Let us listen
You will listen to a conversation between a mother and son. As you listen, 
select four true statements from 1–7 given below. (Transcript for the teacher 
on pg. 41)
    Statements True or False

Let us explore
 I Do you know how persons with 
visual challenges are able to read 
and write? They read through 
touch with the help of Braille, a 
code of raised dots that represents 
the letters of the alphabet. This 
tactile code was developed over 
a period of nine years by Louis 
Braille, who became blind at a very 
young age due to an accident. 
37
Louis Braille 
(Courtesy FMT)
Unit 1.indd   37Unit 1.indd   37 06-Mar-25   2:47:33 PM06-Mar-25   2:47:33 PM
Reprint 2026-27


--- SOURCE PAGE 38 ---
38
Poorvi
  Study the code given below and write your name using it. You may use 
bindis or grains of daal to make the dots that you can touch and feel.
 A B C D E F G H I J K L M
             
 N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z
             
 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9
          
 II Have you heard about the International Day of Persons with Disabilities? 
Find out when and how it is observed in India. Write your findings on a 
sheet and put it up on the class board.
 III Do you want to know about sign language? Go to the link given below to 
learn about the Indian sign language.
  https://ncert.nic.in/pdf/accessibility/ISL_200word_v15.pdf
Unit 1.indd   38Unit 1.indd   38 06-Mar-25   2:47:33 PM06-Mar-25   2:47:33 PM
Reprint 2026-27


--- SOURCE PAGE 39 ---
the Day the RiveR Spoke

Let us listen (refer to page 12)
 I Read the words given in the box below. You will listen to five people 
speak about school life. As you listen, circle the words that are used by 
the speakers. There are two words you do not need. 
SpeakeR (i):  (Father) Should girls attend school? Yes, they 
should. I do my best to ensure that both my son and 
daughter get equal opportunities. I look forward 
to their successful careers and rewarding lives. I 
feel education gives freedom to make choices in 
life. Whether my daughter wants to work in an 
organisation or be a homemaker, it should be her 
choice and the same applies to my son. 
SpeakeR (ii): (Grandmother) I went to school but many girls at 
that time could not attend school because some 
elders in the village felt that girls should help in 
the house and take care of their little brothers and 
sisters. I am happy that the situation has changed 
today.
SpeakeR (iii): (Teacher) The school prepares students for 
meaningful and useful participation in the world 
of work by learning hands-on abilities and skills, 
developing equal respect for head-hands-heart, 
valuing the dignity of labour, and understanding 
vocational choices for the future. 
SpeakeR (iv): (Student) I like to go to school. I feel that by coming 
to school and reading the books, I learn about things 
from all over the world. I also have friends with 
whom I can share my feelings. 
TRANSCRIPTS
39
Learning TogeTher
Unit 1.indd   39Unit 1.indd   39 06-Mar-25   2:47:33 PM06-Mar-25   2:47:33 PM
Reprint 2026-27


--- SOURCE PAGE 40 ---
SpeakeR (v) : (Principal) Everyone should attend school. You 
must’ve noticed that the girls are doing very well. 
However, as the Head of an institution, I know that 
all students can work hard. My message to students 
is that they should attend school regularly and take 
part in every school activity without bothering 
whether it is for girls or boys. The idea is to focus on 
learning. 
 II You will once again listen to the five speakers. As you listen, match each 
statement 1–7 to each speaker (i)–(v). There are two statements that you 
do not need.

Let us listen (refer to page 24)
 1. You will listen to a story about an ant. Read the questions given below 
and before you listen, guess the answers to these questions. 
  Hello everyone,
  I’m sure you have enjoyed learning about King Bruce and the spider. Let 
me share another story with you. 
In a thick green forest, there lived a little ant. She was known for 
her determination and never-give-up attitude. One sunny day, 
the ant found a delicious piece of roti that was too big for her to 
carry alone.
“This crumb is huge, but I must get it back to the anthill. My 
family will be so happy!” she thought to herself.
She tried to lift the crumb with all her might, but it was too heavy. 
She tried pushing it, pulling it and even rolling it, but nothing 
seemed to work. Exhausted and saddened, she sat down and 
began to cry.
As the ant sat there, feeling beaten, she noticed a small bird 
nearby. The bird was trying to build a nest. It picked up twigs 
and leaves, but every time it tried to place them, the wind would 
blow them away. However, the bird did not give up. It kept trying, 
over and over again, until finally, it managed to build a strong 
nest.
Poorvi
40
Unit 1.indd   40Unit 1.indd   40 06-Mar-25   2:47:33 PM06-Mar-25   2:47:33 PM
Reprint 2026-27


--- SOURCE PAGE 41 ---
“If that bird can keep trying and succeed, then I shouldn’t give 
up either,” she thought, feeling inspired.
Determined once more, the ant gathered all her strength and 
decided to try again. She called her fellow ants for help. Together, 
they formed a chain and lifted the crumb with their combined 
strength. Slowly but surely, they carried the crumb back to the 
anthill.
“We did it! Thank you, everyone! We showed that with teamwork 
and never giving up, we can achieve anything!” the ant shouted, 
excited and grateful.
She and her friends celebrated their success. 
We too should learn this lesson from the ant’s experience—never 
give up, no matter how difficult the situation may seem. 
Hope you all liked the story. 
Thank you!
 2. Now, listen to the story once again and as you listen, check whether your 
answers are correct. Rectify wherever needed.
thRee DayS to See

Let us listen (refer to page 36)
  You will listen to a conversation between a mother and son. As you listen, 
select four true statements from 1–7 given below.
anUj : Ma, we have a new student in our class, Tara. She’s 
quite talkative and pleasant. You know, the writing in 
her books doesn’t look like ours. It’s different. She told 
us that it’s called Braille.
MotheR : It’s great to know that your school has facilities to 
address the needs of the visually impaired. Thanks to 
the Digital India Initiative, which is paving the way for 
inclusion of the visually impaired.
Learning TogeTher
41
Unit 1.indd   41Unit 1.indd   41 06-Mar-25   2:47:34 PM06-Mar-25   2:47:34 PM
Reprint 2026-27


--- SOURCE PAGE 42 ---
anUj : Oh, Digital India! That’s about being computer literate, 
isn’t it? 
MotheR : Well, Digital India is about more than just internet 
access. It aims to include everyone, including people 
with disabilities, by providing digital infrastructure 
and services. For the visually impaired, it means access 
to assistive technologies like screen readers, voice-over-
enabled smartphones and apps that can make daily 
activities easier.
anUj : Ohh... interesting. What is a screen reader, Ma?
MotheR : I knew you’d ask about it! Well, a screen reader is a 
software application that helps people who are visually 
impaired use computers and smartphones. It reads out 
the text displayed on the screen and provides audio 
feedback.
anUj : That’s amazing! So, Tara can use a computer just like 
we do?
MotheR : Yes, she can. 
anUj : So, it makes a big difference in their daily lives.
MotheR : It certainly does. It ensures that people who are visually 
impaired can use digital services independently, without 
help from others. This can improve their quality of life. 
It also opens up more job opportunities in fields like IT, 
banking, and more, where they can work just efficiently 
like anybody else.
anUj : Wow! So that means people who are visually impaired 
can work and do things on their own? I’m so proud of 
my school.
MotheR : Yes, and thi s way, we can ensure that the benefits of 
Digital India reach everyone, helping them to participate 
fully in all areas of life.
  Remember, inclusion is not just about having the right tools, but also 
about having the right mindset.
Poorvi
42
Unit 1.indd   42Unit 1.indd   42 06-Mar-25   2:47:34 PM06-Mar-25   2:47:34 PM
Reprint 2026-27