Let us listen
You will listen to five speakers share their opinion about adventure 
sports. As you listen match the statements 1–8 with the speakers 
(i)–(v). There are three extra statements that you do not need.  
(Transcript for the teacher on pg. 177)
 
 1. Talks about having basic activities in 
adventure sports
 2. Finds adventure sports thrilling and 
exciting
 3. Praises the availability of a variety of 
activities
 4. Expresses concern about the risks in 
adventure sports  
 5. Promotes trekking as a casual sport
 6. Invites applications from first-timers
 7. Focuses on the availability of training 
and supervision
 8. Finds exposure to risks unnecessary
  Statements   Speaker no.

Let us listen (refer to page 153)
  A famous museum in your town is organising a treasure hunt in the 
museum premises. You and your friends decide to participate in it. Upon 
arrival, you find that there are many other teams. Each team is given an 
audio guide (recorded information) and a map to the museum. 
 1. Look at the map given below. Try and predict what each of the rooms 
might be. 
 2. Listen to the audio recording and as you listen, mark your map with the 
route to take to find the treasure. To help you, the names of a few rooms 
in the museum are given below. Now listen to the audio and mark the 
various rooms.
Welcome to the City Museum. We start our tour at the entrance 
hall. Here you will find the information booth and a display 
devoted to the history of this museum. To the right of the 
Entrance Hall you will find the (i) library. On the left is the 
museum shop. Go straight from the Entrance Hall till you reach 
the (ii) Art Gallery. The gallery is famous for its collection of rare 
paintings from various parts of India. There are three doors that 
lead out of the Art Gallery. The first door on the left leads to the 
Decorative Art Gallery, where you will find items like jewellery, 
carvings, and textiles from Medieval India. The next door is 
temporarily closed due to renovation work. The third door on 
the right leads to the (iii) Weapons Room, where you will find an 
extensive collection of Indian weapons including bows, swords, 
shields, and helmets. From the weapons room take a left turn. 
You will find the world-famous (iv) Musical Instruments Section, 
where you can find musical instruments from every country in 
the world. The second room to the left in this gallery will take 
you to the (v) Auditorium. Hidden here is your treasure! All the 
best to all. May the best team win!
TRANSCRIPTS
176
PooRvi
Unit 4.indd   176Unit 4.indd   176 07-Mar-25   1:52:35 PM07-Mar-25   1:52:35 PM
Reprint 2026-27


--- SOURCE PAGE 39 ---
Travel

Let us listen (refer to page 162)
 1. Listen to this announcement made in the morning assembly about a 
school trip to the National Science Centre. As you listen, circle the words 
that are not correct. 
Good morning students!
I have some very exciting news to share with you all. The much-
awaited educational trip to the National Science Centre will be 
held on 16 September, that is in two weeks! As you know this 
would be a fantastic opportunity to explore and learn more 
about the world around us. 
We will be starting from school at 8.00 in the morning and return 
by 5.30 in the evening. All of you must be in proper school uniform. 
Don’t forget to carry your identity cards. Light refreshments will 
be provided at the museum. But do carry a water bottle and a 
packed lunch. You are not permitted to wear any jewellery or 
carry mobile phones. You may carry a notebook and a pen to 
make notes. Interested students must bring a permission slip 
signed by your parent and submit them to their class teachers 
by 10 September. It is going to be a fun trip so don’t miss out. If 
you have any more questions, please contact Mr. Mukherjee, the 
excursion in-charge. 
 2. Now, listen to the announcement again and rectify the sentences. 
Conquering The SummiT

Let us listen (refer to page 173)
  You will listen to five speakers share their opinion about adventure 
sports. As you listen match the statements 1–8 with the speakers (i)–(v). 
There are three extra statements that you do not need.
Speaker (i):  As a parent, I fear the risks involved, especially 
with activities like rock climbing or paragliding.  
177
TRavel and advenTuRe
Unit 4.indd   177Unit 4.indd   177 07-Mar-25   1:52:35 PM07-Mar-25   1:52:35 PM
Reprint 2026-27


--- SOURCE PAGE 40 ---
I’m quite worried about the safety risks of adventure 
sports. It’s important to consider these risks before 
letting children participate.
Speaker (ii):  Adventure sports are thrilling! All my friends 
agree; it is amazing. It’s not just about fun; it’s about 
pushing your limits and experiencing something 
new. I think it’s worth trying, of course, with a 
trainer. 
Speaker (iii): As organisers of adventure camps, we take safety 
very seriously. Our team ensures all equipment is 
regularly checked and maintained. Participants are 
given thorough training and are always supervised 
by professionals. We focus on minimising risks 
while still providing an exciting experience.
Speaker (iv): At our school, we organise adventure camps with 
activities like trekking and zip-lining. However, we 
stick to basic sports that are safe and manageable 
for students. We always prioritise safety, ensuring 
that all necessary precautions and measures are in 
place. Being careful is what we promote.
Speaker (v): In my opinion, sports should be about fitness and 
enjoyment, like track and field or swimming. Why 
risk your life for a fleeting moment of thrill just for 
a feeling of adventure? Traditional sports are safer 
and just as fulfilling!
PooRvi
178
Unit 4.indd   178Unit 4.indd   178 07-Mar-25   1:52:36 PM07-Mar-25   1:52:36 PM
Reprint 2026-27