Let us discuss
 I Match the words in Column 1 with their meanings in Column 2. Share 
your answers with your classmates and the teacher.
Column 1 Column 2
1. vassal (n) (i) extreme anger
2. coronation (n) (ii) take hold of suddenly or 
forcibly
3. successor (n) (iii) happen in a violent way
4. rash (adj.)
(iv) acting or doing something 
without thinking about the 
consequences
5. sovereign country (n) (v) association or partnership
6. league (n) (vi) a ceremony at which a person is 
made king or queen
7. wrath (n) (vii) fearless
8. seize (v) (viii) capture
9. resolve (n) (ix) a country with a government 
having complete authority
10. raged (v) (x) a country/ state that is 
controlled by a more powerful 
country and has to pay money 
when needed
11. decisive (adj.) (xi) a person who succeeds another
12. apprehended (v) (xii)  take revenge for
13. dauntless (adj) (xiii) showing the ability to make 
decisions effectively 
14. avenge (v) (xiv) determination
Unit 5.indd   213Unit 5.indd   213 06-Mar-25   2:50:21 PM06-Mar-25   2:50:21 PM
Reprint 2026-27


--- SOURCE PAGE 36 ---
Poorvi
214
 II Complete the table given below based on your understanding of the 
story. An example has been done for you. Share your answers with your 
classmates and the teacher.
Cause Effect
1. Ullal had been captured by the 
Portuguese.
 (i) Ullal had to pay a tribute to 
the colonial power.
2.  (ii) Rani Abbakka’s husband 
Veera Narsimha felt it was a 
hasty decision. 
3. Veera Narsimha ordered the 
soldiers to stop Rani Abbakka 
when she said she would not be 
frightened by the Portuguese.
 (iii)
4. Rani Abbakka addressed a 
meeting of rajas for their 
support, who felt they would 
be no match for the Portuguese 
army and their power. 
 (iv) 
5.  (v) Rani Abbakka in turn attacked 
the Portuguese Fort.
	 Let 	us	think	and	reflect
 I Read the extract given below and answer the questions that follow.
  Portuguese envoy: Our Governor has sent me to remind you that the 
annual tribute from Ullal is long overdue and...
  Rani Abbakka: We are a sovereign country. We don’t pay tribute to 
Portugal. And we don’t take orders from the Portuguese!
  Portuguese envoy: Your Majesty, you will regret your stand.
  Abbakka ordered merchant ships to be built and in alliance with the 
Zamorin of Kozhikode, she defied the Portuguese and established a hugely 
profitable trading relation with Arabia.
 1. What does the word ‘tribute’ mean in this context?
 2. Complete the sentence with a suitable reason.
Unit 5.indd   214Unit 5.indd   214 06-Mar-25   2:50:21 PM06-Mar-25   2:50:21 PM
Reprint 2026-27


--- SOURCE PAGE 37 ---
Bravehearts
  Rani Abbakka says, “We are a sovereign country” because __________.
 3. Identify whether the following statement is true or false.
  The Portuguese envoy threatened Rani Abbakka. 
 4. Choose a word given in brackets to replace the underlined word.
  “… she defied the Portuguese and established a hugely profitable 
trading relation with Arabia.” (defeated/disobeyed)
 5. Choose the option that lists the qualities of Rani Abbakka, based on 
this extract.
 (i) bold (ii) thoughtful (iii) capable
 (iv) generous (v) determined
 A. (i), (ii), and (v)   B.  (ii), (iii), and (iv)      C.  (i), (iii), and (v) 
 D. (ii), (iv), and (v)
 II Answer the following questions.
 1. Rani Abbakka spoke to her mother on her deathbed. 
How might these words have made her mother feel? 
 2. What does the support of the people of Ullal and the 
soldiers for Rani Abbakka suggest about their mindset?
 3. How might the people of Ullal have felt when the mighty 
Portuguese were defeated?
 4. Why do you think Rani Abbakka’s victory against the 
Portuguese would have inspired other rulers to go 
against a foreign power?