                                       Exploring
                        2          Substances: Acidic,
                                     Basic, and Neutral
                   On 28 February, the school hosted a science fair to celebrate
                   National Science Day. At the entry gate, siblings Ashwin and
                   Keerthi were greeted with a white sheet of paper. They were
                   curious to know why a white sheet of paper was given to them!
                      A few steps ahead, there was a volunteer spraying a liquid
                   on these sheets of paper. The siblings also got their white sheets
                   sprayed. To their surprise, the words ‘Welcome to the Wonderful
                   World of Science’ appeared on the papers the moment the liquid
                   was sprayed (Fig. 2.1). They were excited and eager to know how
                   this happened and the reason behind it.
                      Their curiosity was partly satisﬁed at the ‘Colourful World
                   of Substances’ stall. They saw many activities showing colour
                   changes on mixing diﬀerent substances. They decided to explore
                   these changes further. Let us join them on this learning adventure.




                                                                        Fig. 2.1: Scene of a science fair
                                                      Reprint 2026-27


Chapter 2.indd 7                                                                                            4/3/2025 4:50:42 PM
                                               2.1 Nature — Our Science Laboratory

                                               2.1.1 Litmus as an indicator
                                               Activity 2.1: Let us explore

                                               Collect samples of lemon juice, soap solution, amla juice,
                                                tamarind water, vinegar, baking soda solution, lime water,
                                                tap water, washing powder solution, sugar solution, and salt
                                                solution.
                                                                                   Take a strip of blue litmus paper
                                                                                    and cut it into small pieces.
                                                                                   Spread these pieces on a clean
                                                                                    and dry white tile.
                                                                                   Using a dropper, put one drop of
                                                                                    each of the samples, one-by-one,
                                                                                    on these litmus paper pieces, as
                                                                                    shown in Fig. 2.2a.
                                             Fig. 2.2(a): Colour change in
                                                   blue litmus paper

                                              Do you observe any change
                                               in the colour of the blue
                                               litmus pieces?
                                              Record your observations
                                               in Table 2.1.
 Curiosity | Textbook of Science | Grade 7




                                              Repeat the same activity
                                               with pieces of red litmus
                                               paper     as   shown      in
                                                                                         Fig. 2.2(b): Colour change in
                                               Fig. 2.2b and record your                        red litmus paper
                                               observations in Table 2.1.


                                               How to prepare lime water?
                                               Do not confuse lime water with the word lime, which is a fruit
                                               similar to lemon.
                                                   Lime water (solution of calcium hydroxide in water) can be
                                               easily prepared by mixing lime (chuna, i.e. calcium oxide) in water
                                               and leaving it undisturbed for some time, say an hour. Filter the
                                               liquid into another container and use it as lime water.




         8

                                                                      Reprint 2026-27


Chapter 2.indd 8                                                                                                         4/3/2025 4:50:43 PM
                                                                                                                 9

                    Table 2.1: Testing the nature of samples with blue and red litmus papers




                                                                                                               Exploring Substances: Acidic, Basic, and Neutral
                                                         Colour of blue         Colour of red
                                                      litmus paper after     litmus paper after
                   S.No.    Name of the sample
                                                       putting a drop of      putting a drop of
                                                            sample                 sample

                      1.   Lemon juice

                      2.   Soap solution

                      3.   Amla juice

                      4.   Tamarind water

                      5.   Vinegar

                      6.   Baking soda solution

                      7.   Lime water

                      8.   Tap water

                      9.   Washing powder solution

                    10.    Sugar solution

                     11.   Salt solution

                     12.   Any other

                      Now, let us analyse Table 2.1 and sort the samples into
                   three groups as follows —
                     Group A with samples that turn the blue litmus paper to red.
                     Group B with samples that turn the red litmus paper to blue.
                     Group C with samples that do not aﬀect either of the two
                      litmus papers.
                   Record the data in Table 2.2.

                    Table 2.2: Grouping of samples tested in Table 2.1

                           Group A                   Group B               Group C




                                                       Reprint 2026-27


Chapter 2.indd 9                                                                                  4/3/2025 4:50:43 PM
                                                       I am curious to know — what are these
                                                       red and blue litmus paper strips made of?
                                                       Why do they change colour when drops
                                                       of some samples are put on them?


                                                                                                   Fig. 2.3: Blue and red litmus
                                                Let us ﬁnd out!                                             paper strips

                                                Litmus is a natural substance obtained from lichens. It is
                                                available both as a solution and in the form of paper strips,
                                                known as litmus paper. The litmus paper is available in two
                                                colours—blue and red, as shown in Fig. 2.3.
                                                    Substances that turn blue litmus paper to red are acidic in
                                                nature, while those that turn red litmus paper to blue are basic
                                                in nature. Since litmus shows diﬀerent colours in acidic and basic
                                                solutions, it is called an acid-base indicator.
                                                    Some other substances, both natural and synthetic, can
                                                also be used as indicators. Synthetic indicators are made in
                                                laboratories, and you will learn more about them in higher
                                                grades.



                                                          HOLISTIC LENS
                                                          Lichens are formed by the association of two
                                                          living organisms, a fungus and an alga. They grow
                                                          on rocks and trees in regions that have abundant
                                                          rainfall and clean air. Do you ﬁnd lichens on trees
                                                          in your neighbourhood?
                                             Lichens
 Curiosity | Textbook of Science | Grade 7




                                                  Now, let us classify the substances sorted in Group A, Group B,
                                                and Group C in Table 2.2.
                                                  The substances in Group A, such as lemon juice, amla juice,
                                                    tamarind water, and vinegar turned the blue litmus paper to
                                                    red, implying that these substances are acidic in nature.
                                                  The substances in Group B, such as soap solution, baking
                                                   soda solution, lime water, and washing powder solution
                                                   turned the red litmus paper to blue. Hence, these substances
                                                   are basic in nature.
                                                  The substances in Group C, such as tap water, sugar solution,
                                                   and salt solution, did not change the colour of either litmus
                                                   paper. Can you predict their nature?
                                                   These substances are said to be neutral because they are
                                                neither acidic nor basic.

 10

                                                                         Reprint 2026-27


Chapter 2.indd 10                                                                                                                  4/3/2025 4:50:45 PM
                                                                                                        11

                      Activity 2.2: Let us relate and explore




                                                                                                          Exploring Substances: Acidic, Basic, and Neutral
                    Are all the substances in Group A of Table 2.2 edible? Have you
                    ever tasted these edible substances? Can you recall their taste?
                    You will ﬁnd that all these substances taste sour. Thus, we can
                    say that substances that taste sour tend to contain acids and are
                    acidic in nature.
                    Caution — Do not taste anything until asked to do so. Do not taste any
                    unknown substance.
                      Some common edible substances and the names of the most
                    common acids present in them are given in Fig. 2.4.
                                                          Citric acid


                                                         Ascorbic acid (Vitamin C)
                                                         and Citric acid


                                                         Tartaric acid



                                                         Citric acid and Oxalic acid


                         Fig. 2.4: The most common acids present in some edible substances

                       Find out and write the names of the most common acids
                    present in the following substances —
                    Lemon________, Curd________, Tamarind________, Vinegar________.
                        Now, let us take one of the substances — baking soda
                    solution — from Group B. Rub the baking soda solution between
                    your ﬁngers. What do you observe?
                        It feels soapy or slippery. Basic substances are generally
                    slippery to touch.
                        Also, bases generally taste bitter, but Now, I can check
                    everything that tastes bitter may not the nature of ﬂoor
                    contain a base. For example, bitter gourd cleaning liquid using
                    (karela) possesses a bitter taste but is not an indicator!
                    basic in nature.


                                            If litmus is not available, are there
                                            some other natural substances
                                            that can serve as acid-base
                                            indicators?




                                                            Reprint 2026-27


Chapter 2.indd 11                                                                            4/3/2025 4:50:46 PM
                                                                   2.1.2 Red rose as an indicator
                                                                   You might have observed many coloured ﬂowers in your
                                                                   surroundings. Try making your indicators using these ﬂowers.

                                                                     Activity 2.3: Let us prepare

                                                                     Collect some fallen petals of
                                                                      red roses available in your
                                                                      surroundings (Fig. 2.5). It is
                                                                      advised not to pluck ﬂowers. You
                                                                      may pick petals or ﬂowers fallen
                                                                      on the ground.
                                                                     Take a ﬁstful of the collected
                                                                      petals of red roses and wash
                                                                      them with water.
                                                                     Crush the petals using a mortar                    Fig. 2.5: Red roses
                                                                      and pestle.
                                              Fig. 2.6: Red rose
                                                                     Place them in a glass tumbler.
                                             petals immersed in
                                                  hot water          Pour some hot water into the glass tumbler to ensure that
                                                                      the crushed ﬂower petals are completely immersed.
                                                                   Caution — Perform this step under the supervision of an adult.
                                                                     Cover the glass tumbler with a lid. Wait for 5 – 10 minutes till
                                                                      the water becomes coloured (Fig. 2.6), and ﬁlter it.
                                                                     The ﬁltrate (liquid after ﬁltration) is the required ﬂower
                                                                      extract (Fig. 2.7) to be used as an acid-base indicator.
 Curiosity | Textbook of Science | Grade 7




                                                                                                                             Test tube



                                                                                                                             Test tube stand


                                                                                                                             Red rose extract


                                                                            Fig. 2.7: Test tube containing the red rose extract

                                                                     Activity 2.4: Let us ﬁnd out

                                                                     Place 10 – 20 drops of the prepared red rose extract in each
                                                                      of two small transparent bottles or test tubes. Mark them
                                                                      A and B.
 12

                                                                                         Reprint 2026-27


Chapter 2.indd 12                                                                                                                               4/3/2025 4:50:47 PM
                                                                                                             13
                      Add    20 – 30    drops   of
                       lemon juice in test tube A                    A        B
                       and 20 – 30 drops of soap




                                                                                                               Exploring Substances: Acidic, Basic, and Neutral
                       solution in test tube B with
                       the help of droppers.
                      Observe and record any
                       colour changes (Fig. 2.8) to
                       the extract in Table 2.3.
                      Repeat the same with the
                       other samples used in Fig. 2.8: The changes in colour of the
                       Activity 2.1 and record your     red rose extract on adding
                       observations in Table 2.3.   lemon juice (A) and soap solution (B)


                     Table 2.3: Testing the nature of samples with the red rose extract

                                                        The colour of the
                                                        red rose extract          Nature of the
                     S.No.         Name of the sample   after adding the           substance
                                                             sample

                      1.     Lemon juice

                      2.     Soap solution

                      3.     Amla juice

                      4.     ...

                    Discuss your observations with your classmates.
                      Are the samples that change the colour of the ﬂower extract
                        to a shade of red the same as those that changed the colour
                        of blue litmus paper to red? (Group A, Table 2.2)
                      Are the samples that change the colour of the ﬂower extract
                       to a shade of green the same as those that changed the colour
                       of red litmus paper to blue? (Group B, Table 2.2)
                      Are the samples that do not change the colour of the ﬂower
                       extract the same as those that did not change the colour of
                       red and blue litmus papers? (Group C, Table 2.2)
                       From the above activity, we can conclude that the red rose
                    extract can also be used to test the nature of the substances;
                    hence, it is another example of an acid-base indicator. We can
                    conclude that the red rose extract seems to give red colour in an
                    acidic solution and green colour in a basic solution.
                       Can you now ﬁll in the nature of the substances in Table 2.3?



                                                        Reprint 2026-27


Chapter 2.indd 13                                                                                 4/3/2025 4:50:47 PM
                                                  We are sure that you will be excited about the above results.
                                               You may repeat the process of preparing the extract and testing
                                               substances with some vegetables, fruits, or ﬂowers, such as
                                               beetroot, purple cabbage, turmeric, Indian blackberry (jamun),
                                               and red hibiscus (gudhal) ﬂower. They can also act as acid-base
                                               indicators.
                                             FASCINATING FACTS
                                             Hydrangea is a plant that
                                             grows in cooler climates in
                                             the Himalayan region and the
                                             North-eastern states. It gives
                                             ﬂowers of diﬀerent colours,
                                             depending on the nature of the
                                             soil. Acidic soil produces blue-
                                             coloured ﬂowers, whereas
                                                                                          Hydrangea ﬂowers
                                             in basic soil, the ﬂowers are
                                             pink or red. Can gardeners alter the colour of hydrangea ﬂowers by
                                             adjusting the acidic or basic nature of the soil?


                                               2.1.3 Turmeric as an indicator
                                               We have used blue and red litmus paper strips in Activity 2.1. Can
                                               you also make paper strips with some other natural indicators?
                                               Find out by performing the following activity.

                                                 Activity 2.5: Let us prepare

                                                 Take a spoonful of turmeric (haldi) in a petri dish or container
                                                  and add a little water to make a paste (Fig. 2.9a). You may
                                                  also grind a piece of fresh turmeric.
 Curiosity | Textbook of Science | Grade 7




                                                 Carefully dip a piece of ﬁlter paper in the turmeric paste
                                                  until it gets yellow colour.
                                                 Take it out and allow it to dry.
                                                 Cut this yellow paper into thin strips, which are used as
                                                  ‘turmeric paper’ (Fig. 2.9b).
                                               Caution — Perform this step under the supervision of an adult.




                                                              (a) Turmeric paste       (b) Turmeric paper strips
                                                                   Fig. 2.9: Preparing turmeric paper

 14

                                                                     Reprint 2026-27


Chapter 2.indd 14                                                                                                    4/3/2025 4:50:49 PM
                                                                                                        15
                      Using a dropper, put a drop of each of the samples used in
                       Activity 2.1, one by one, on separate pieces of turmeric paper.




                                                                                                          Exploring Substances: Acidic, Basic, and Neutral
                      Record your observations in Table 2.4.

                     Table 2.4: Testing the nature of samples with turmeric paper


                                                        The colour of the turmeric paper
                    S.No.       Name of the sample
                                                        after putting a drop of the sample

                      1.    Lemon juice

                      2.    Soap solution

                      3.    Amla juice

                      4.    …



                    What did you observe?
                     Do all samples change the colour of the turmeric paper?
                      Group the samples which do not change the colour of the
                       turmeric paper.
                       Compare them with the
                    samples in Group A, Group B, I got a curry stain on my white
                    and Group C in Table 2.2.        shirt and on applying soap it
                       Can turmeric paper be changed its colour! Wow! Now I
                    used as an indicator for acidic know the reason.
                    substances?    Discuss    your
                    observations with your classmates.
                       Based on the observations, we can conclude that turmeric
                    paper can be used to test basic substances. However, it cannot
                    diﬀerentiate between acidic and neutral substances.

                      FASCINATING FACTS
                      Why is turmeric known as a ‘Golden’ spice?
                         Turmeric is a member of the ginger family,
                      which is grown in India and other countries.
                      A common spice in daily households, it is being
                      researched for beneﬁts beyond the taste and
                                                                        Turmeric (Haldi)
                      colour it provides to the food! In the Ayurvedic
                      system of medicine, turmeric is considered to have numerous health
                      beneﬁts, and is commonly used in several traditional home remedies.




                                                       Reprint 2026-27


Chapter 2.indd 15                                                                            4/3/2025 4:50:50 PM
                                                Ashwin created a greeting card to pay gratitude to his teacher
                                             on the day of Guru Purnima. He applied turmeric paste on white
                                                                                       paper and dried it. He wrote
                                                                                       his wishes in the teacher's
                                                                                       mother      tongue      (Odia
                                                                                       language) on the dried paper
                                                                                       using one of the solutions
                                                                                       tested in Table 2.4. Which
                                                  I respect my teacher as she nurtured
                                                  curiosity within me and bestowed     solution can be used to write
                                                  upon me the gift of learning. I bow  the message? His teacher
                                                  my head in gratitude to her!         applauded his creative use
                                                                                       of this concept.




                                                                             Are there any substances
                                                                             whose odours change on
                                                                             adding acidic or basic
                                                                             substances?


                                                There are some substances whose odours change in an acidic
                                             or basic medium. These are called olfactory indicators.
                                             Let us explore more!

                                               Activity 2.6: Let us investigate

                                               Take some ﬁnely chopped onions in a container, along with
                                                some strips of clean cotton cloth or ﬁlter paper.
 Curiosity | Textbook of Science | Grade 7




                                               Tightly close the container and leave it overnight.
                                               Take two of the cotton cloth or ﬁlter paper strips from the
                                                container and check their odour.
                                               Keep them on a clean surface and put a few drops of
                                                tamarind water on one strip and a few drops of baking soda
                                                solution on the other. Allow the drops to spread on the strips.
                                               Check the odour again.
                                               Do you notice any change in the odour of the onion strips
                                                before and after putting tamarind water and baking soda
                                                solution on them?
                                               Note your observations.
                                               Similarly, test the change in the odour with other acidic and
                                                basic substances and record your observations.


 16

                                                                   Reprint 2026-27


Chapter 2.indd 16                                                                                                      4/3/2025 4:50:51 PM
                                                                                                                                17

                       KNOW A SCIENTIST




                                                                                                                                  Exploring Substances: Acidic, Basic, and Neutral
                       Acharya Prafulla Chandra Ray (P.C. Ray) is known as the
                       ‘Father of Modern Indian Chemistry’. He earned a doctorate
                       in chemistry from the United Kingdom and returned to
                                         India. He contributed towards advancing
                                         scientiﬁc research in India. He also
                                         established India’s ﬁrst pharmaceutical
                                         company (a company in the ﬁeld of
                                         medicines) in 1901. He was a person rooted
                                         in Indian culture and knowledge traditions.
                                         Through his writings on the history of
                                         chemistry in India, he highlighted the
                                         achievements and expertise of ancient
                       Indian scientists to the modern world. Ray, a social reformer,
                       also advocated the use of the mother tongue as a medium of
                       instruction in educational institutions.




                     2.2 What Happens When Acidic Substances
                         Mix with Basic Substances?
                    Let us investigate by performing the following experiment.

                     Activity 2.7: Let us experiment

                      Take one drop of lemon juice in a test tube and
                       add around twenty drops of water to it. Observe
                       the colour.
                      Add a drop of blue litmus solution to it.
                                                                                   Fig. 2.10(a): The colour of the
                      Do you observe any colour change (Fig. 2.10a)?             solution on adding blue litmus
                                                                                              solution
                      Slowly add drops of lime water to this test tube with
                       the help of a dropper and swirl it well.
                      What do you observe? Is there any change in the
                       colour of the solution?
                      A stage comes when the colour of the solution
                       changes from red to blue (Fig. 2.10b).
                      Again, add one drop of lemon juice to the above
                       solution.
                    Can you predict why there is a change in colour?              Fig. 2.10(b): The colour of the
                                                                                  solution on adding lime water




                                                          Reprint 2026-27


Chapter 2.indd 17                                                                                                    4/3/2025 4:50:52 PM
                                                                   Initially, when a drop of blue litmus solution is added to the
                                                               lemon juice solution, the colour of the solution turns red. When
                                                               lime water is added to this test tube, the colour of the solution
                                                               eventually changes from red to blue. This shows that the solution
                                                               in the test tube is no longer acidic. Lime water has neutralised
                                                               the eﬀect of the acid.
                                                                   When the solution of an acid is mixed with the solution of a
                                                               base in suﬃcient quantity, we ﬁnd that the resulting solution is
                                                               neither acidic nor basic. Such reactions are called neutralisation
                                                               reactions. In a neutralisation reaction, salt and water are formed
                                                               with the evolution (i.e., release) of heat.
                                                                                   Acid + Base → Salt + Water + Heat
                                                                  There are many examples in everyday life where you can
                                                               observe the use of neutralisation processes.
                                                               Let us ﬁnd out!

                                                                                   2.3 Neutralisation in Daily Life
                                                                                  Situation 1: Keerthi was observing a butterﬂy in
                                                                                  the garden with her hand resting on a tree trunk.
                                                                                  Suddenly, a red ant bit her, leaving her skin red
                                                                                  with stinging pain (Fig. 2.11). Her brother helped
                                                                                  her by applying moist baking soda to the aﬀected
                                                                                  area, which relieved the pain. What do you think
                                                                                  might be the reason for this?
                                                                                     When an ant bites, it injects an acidic liquid
                                                                                  (formic acid) into the skin. The eﬀect of the acid
                                                                                  can be neutralised by rubbing moist baking soda,
 Curiosity | Textbook of Science | Grade 7




                                                                                  which is a base.
                                                  Fig. 2.11: Stinging eﬀect          What remedies do people use to treat ant bites
                                                        of an ant bite            in your region?
                                                                                          Situation 2: On the Farmer’s Portal (an
                                                                                          online platform from the Department of
                                                                                          Agriculture, Cooperation and Farmers
                                                                                          Welfare), a query from a farmer states, “My
                                                                                          plants are not growing well lately”. After
                                                                                          a detailed discussion, it was found that
                                                                                          the excessive use of chemical fertilisers
                                                                                          (substances added to soil to help plants
                                                                                          grow better) made the soil acidic. What
                                                                                          remedy might be provided to him?
                                                                                             When the soil is too acidic, the plants
                                             Fig. 2.12: Neutralising the acidic           do not grow well. It can be treated with
                                                        nature of soil                    lime, which is a base. (Fig. 2.12).
 18

                                                                                      Reprint 2026-27


Chapter 2.indd 18                                                                                                                       4/3/2025 4:50:53 PM
                                                                                                      19
                        If the soil is basic, organic matter like manure and composted
                    leaves are added to it. Organic matter releases acids that
                    neutralise the basic nature of the soil.




                                                                                                        Exploring Substances: Acidic, Basic, and Neutral
                        Sometimes, the soil may be neutral, but the plants growing in
                    it may still show poor health, which can be due to the deﬁciency
                    of nutrients in the soil.
                    Situation 3: Ashwin’s friend Gurbir stays near an industrial area.
                    He shared with him that the ﬁsh population in his neighbourhood
                    lake was declining day by day! What do you think might be the
                    causes for this? It may be due to factory waste being released
                    into the lake.
                        If the factory waste is acidic in nature, what could be done to
                    save the ﬁsh in the lake?
                        The factory waste can be neutralised by adding basic
                    substances before releasing into the lake.
                    Let us wrap up!
                    Now, can you explain why the words ‘Welcome to the Wonderful
                    World of Science’ appeared on Ashwin and Keerthi’s paper sheets
                    when the liquid was sprayed on them?
                        Do you think that one possibility could be using a turmeric
                    solution for the spraying liquid and a soap solution for writing
                    on the paper?

                     In a Nutshell

                      Substances around us may be classiﬁed as acidic, basic, and
                       neutral in nature.
                      Extracts of lichen, red rose, red hibiscus, purple cabbage,
                       turmeric, etc., can be used to indicate the nature of substances.
                      Substances that show diﬀerent colours in acidic and basic
                       solutions are called acid-base indicators.
                      Acids turn the colour of blue litmus to red. Bases turn the
                       colour of red litmus to blue.
                      Extract of red rose gives red colour in acidic solutions and
                       green colour in basic solutions.
                      The yellow colour of turmeric turns red in basic solutions
                       but remains unchanged in acidic and neutral solutions.
                      An acid and a base neutralise each other, forming salt and
                       water, along with the evolution of heat.
                      Many day-to-day problems like a red ant bite, acidic or basic
                       nature of soil, and industrial waste can be attempted to be
                       managed by the process of neutralisation.



                                                        Reprint 2026-27


Chapter 2.indd 19                                                                          4/3/2025 4:50:53 PM
                                                                      Let Us Enhance Our Learning

                                                                     1. A solution turns the red litmus paper to blue. Excess addition
                                                                         of which of the following solution would reverse the change?
                                                                          (i) Lime water
                                                                         (ii) Baking soda
                                                                        (iii) Vinegar
                                                                        (iv) Common salt solution
                                                                     2. You are provided with three unknown solutions labelled A,
                                                                         B, and C, but you do not know which of these are acidic, basic,
                                                                         or neutral. Upon adding a few drops of red litmus solution
                                                                         to solution A, it turns blue. When a few drops of turmeric
                                                                         solution are added to solution B, it turns red. Finally, after
                                                                         adding a few drops of red rose extract to solution C, it turns
                                                                         green.
                                                                             Based on the observations, which of the following is the
                                                                         correct sequence for the nature of solutions A, B, and C?
                                                                          (i) Acidic, acidic, and acidic
                                                                         (ii) Neutral, basic, and basic
                                                                        (iii) Basic, basic, and acidic
                                             ENQUIRY                    (iv) Basic, basic, and basic
                                                                     3. Observe and analyse Figs. 2.13, 2.14, and 2.15, in which
                                                                         red rose extract paper strips are used. Label the nature of
                                                                         solutions present in each of the containers.

                                                 ?
 Curiosity | Textbook of Science | Grade 7




                                              WHY        WHAT IF

                                                 WHERE         W
                                                               H          Fig. 2.13                   Fig. 2.14
                                                               E                                                               Fig. 2.15
                                                               N
                                             H     WHAT
                                             O     COULD
                                             W                       4. A liquid sample from the laboratory was tested using various
                                                               CAN      indicators:
                                             L
                                             O             ?    IT
                                                   W
                                             N     H                 Indicator        Red litmus            Blue litmus   Turmeric
                                             G     I
                                                   C       WHOSE
                                                   H                 Change           No change             Turned red    No change in colour
                                             WE
                                             H L     WHAT WILL
                                             A S
                                             T E
                                                      HAPPEN             Based on the tests, identify the acidic or basic nature of the
                                                                         liquid and justify your answer.
                                              WHY         WHAT
                                              NOT        SHOULD



 20

                                                                                          Reprint 2026-27


Chapter 2.indd 20                                                                                                                               4/3/2025 4:50:54 PM
                                                                                                                                21
                     5. Manya is blindfolded. She is given two unknown solutions to
                        test and determine whether they are acidic or basic. Which
                        indicator should Manya use to test the solutions and why?




                                                                                                                                  Exploring Substances: Acidic, Basic, and Neutral
                     6. Could you suggest various materials which can be used for
                        writing the message on the white sheet of paper (given at
                        the beginning of the chapter) and what could be in the spray                   INNOVATION
                        bottle? Make a table of various possible combinations and
                        the colour of the writing obtained.
                                                                                                        DISCOVERY
                     7. Grape juice was mixed with red rose extract; the mixture got
                        a tint of red colour. What will happen if baking soda is added
                        to this mixture? Justify your answer.                                           ENQUIRY

                     8. Keerthi wrote a secret message to her grandmother on her
                        birthday using orange juice. Can you assist her grandmother                    EXPLORATION
                        in revealing the message? Which indicator would you use to
                        make it visible?                                                                CURIOSITY
                     9. How can natural indicators be prepared? Explain by giving
                        an example.
                    10. Three liquids are given to you. One is vinegar, another is a
                        baking soda solution, and the third is a sugar solution. Can
                        you identify them only using turmeric paper? Explain.
                    11. The extract of red rose turns the liquid X to green. What will
                        the nature of liquid X be? What will happen when excess of
                        amla juice is added to liquid X?
                    12. Observe and analyse the information given in the following
                        ﬂowchart. Complete the missing information.


                                              Imagine a garden with plants
                                              showing signs of poor health.



                     The soil can be ______ in nature.                  The soil can be ______ in nature.



                                              Which indicator can be used
                                              to test the nature of the soil?
                                                     _________________



                          The acidic soil can be treated            The basic soil can be treated
                          with ________________________.            with ________________________.




                                                           Reprint 2026-27


Chapter 2.indd 21                                                                                                    4/3/2025 4:50:55 PM
                                                                                     DIVE
                                                                                      EEPER         Aman accidentally spilt vinegar on some pieces
                                                                                                    of an eggshell or marble and noticed bubbling.
                                                                                                    He then poured a soap solution on another
                                                                                                    piece of eggshell or marble, but no bubbles
                                                                                                    appeared. Why did bubbles occur with vinegar
                                                                                                    but not with soap solution?
                                                          Disciplinary




                                                                                   Exploratory Projects

                                                                                    Create rangoli using acidic or basic substances and natural
                                                                                     indicators.
                                                History                  Art
                                                                                    You may discuss in your class the acidic, basic, or neutral
                                                                                     nature of water obtained from various sources. You may
                                                                                     like to test the water samples available from sources such as
                                             Geography                   Society     rain, taps, rivers, etc.
                                                                                    Collect a soil sample of your area and ﬁnd out whether it is
                                                                                     acidic, basic, or neutral in nature.
                                             Technology                  Economy
                                                          Inter
 Curiosity | Textbook of Science | Grade 7




 22

                                                                                                     Reprint 2026-27


Chapter 2.indd 22                                                                                                                                    4/3/2025 4:50:56 PM
