                                          Life Processes
                         10                  in Plants
                      In Grade 6, we learnt that all living beings grow and need food
                      for their growth. Also, in the previous chapter, we discussed the
                      process through which animals obtain nutrition.
                         We know that animals eat food to grow, but what about
                      plants? Have you ever seen plants eating food like animals do?
                      As animals grow, their size and weight usually increase, and their
                      bodies undergo various changes. What changes do you notice in
                      plants when they grow?
                         We learnt that food provides nutrients like carbohydrates,
                      fats, proteins, vitamins, and minerals, which, along with water,
                      are all essential for growth. Let us explore how plants obtain
                      nutrients for their growth.




                                                         Reprint 2026-27


Chapter 10.indd 137                                                                        4/3/2025 4:55:45 PM
                                                                  10.1 How Do Plants Grow?
                                                                 Look around your neighbourhood. Have you observed any
                                                                 changes in a plant during its life span? As a plant grows, new
                                                                 leaves and branches emerge, its height increases, and its stem
                                                                 thickens. What do you think causes these changes? Discuss with
                                                                 your friends and provide your explanation as well.



                                                        When we water plants
                                                                                               Maybe plants take
                                                      regularly, they grow better.
                                                                                              up food from the soil
                                                         So, I think water also
                                                                                              through their roots.
                                                       contributes to its growth.



                                                            I think sunlight plays             I think, maybe, ________
                                                           some role in the growth                 plays some role!
                                                                  of plants.




                                                                 Let us perform an experiment to test some of these explanations.

                                                                   Activity 10.1: Let us test some explanations

                                                                   Take three earthen pots (or used bottles/containers) of the
                                                                    same size ﬁlled with garden soil. Plant saplings of similar sizes
                                                                                              of a fast-growing plant like chilli or
 Curiosity | Textbook of Science | Grade 7




                                                                                              tomato in each pot (Fig. 10.1).
                                                                                                    Label the pots A, B, and C.
                                                                                                    Count the number of leaves on
                                                                                                     each sapling and record your
                                                                                                     observations.
                                                       A             B             C                Place pot A in direct sunlight. Keep
                                                                                                     the soil in this pot slightly moist
                                                                                                     by adding an adequate amount of
                                             (a) Pot A kept in (b) Pot B kept in (c) Pot C kept in   water every day (Fig. 10.1a).
                                             direct sunlight, direct sunlight,    the dark, with
                                               with water       without water          water        Place pot B in direct sunlight,
                                                Fig. 10.1: Experimental set-up to understand         without adding water to the soil
                                               the role of sunlight and water in plant growth        (Fig. 10.1b).



138

                                                                                         Reprint 2026-27


Chapter 10.indd 138                                                                                                                         4/3/2025 4:55:47 PM
                                                                                                                            139
                        Place pot C in the dark. Keep the soil in this pot slightly moist
                         by adding an adequate amount of water every day (Fig. 10.1c).




                                                                                                                              Life Processes in Plants
                        Observe the plants for two weeks1 and record changes in
                         their height, number of leaves, colour of leaves, and any
                         other changes that may appear.
                        Record your observations in Table 10.1.

                       Table 10.1: Eﬀect of sunlight and water on plant growth


                                                              Height of plant                          Colour of
                                                                                    Number of
                         Pots kept         Availability of        (cm)                                   leaves
                                                                                      leaves
                          under                                                                      (Green/Yellow)
                         diﬀerent
                        conditions                                       After 2           After 2
                                         Sunlight    Water     Day 1               Day 1
                                                                         weeks             weeks

                      Pot A: In direct
                      sunlight, with
                      water

                      Pot B: In direct
                      sunlight,
                      without water

                      Pot C: In the
                      dark, with
                      water

                        What diﬀerences did you observe between the plants in the
                         three pots?
                        Which pot has the plant with the maximum growth?
                        Which pot has the plant with the least growth?
                         Analyse the observations recorded in Table 10.1, and discuss
                      them with your teacher and friends.
                         You are likely to ﬁnd that the plant in Pot A, kept in direct
                      sunlight with adequate water, grows better than the plant in Pot
                      C, which gets adequate water but no sunlight. The plant in Pot
                      B may have died as it did not get water even though it received
                      adequate sunlight.
                         What do you infer from the observations made in this activity?
                      The results indicate that plants require both sunlight and water
                      for their growth.
                      1 This experiment will need two weeks. Teachers can plan this activity
                        accordingly.




                                                              Reprint 2026-27


Chapter 10.indd 139                                                                                               4/3/2025 4:55:47 PM
                                                                  FASCINATING FACTS
                                                                                    फलकुसमु सपं दुिचता रोपणतो भवित के वलान्न यत: ।
                                                                   “Trees do not produce fruits and flowers merely because they are planted.”
                                                                  This line is from an ancient Indian text named Vrikshayurveda. It records
                                                                  useful observations about plant growth, soil, and agricultural practices to
                                                                  help improve crop health, growth and production. The knowledge in the
                                                                  text seems to be based on practical experiences and patterns seen over
                                                                  time. These ideas were then systematically documented to guide farming
                                                                  practices. For instance, there are references to diﬀerent methods of organic
                                                                  manure preparation, such as mixing water, barley, and various seeds, like
                                                                  green, black, and horse grams.



                                                                             10.2 How Do Plants Get Food for their
                                                                                  Growth?
                                                                            We know that animals get their food from plants, either directly by
                                                                            eating plants or indirectly by eating animals that in turn eat plants
                                                                            for their nutrition and growth. But how do plants obtain the food
                                                                            they need to grow? Unlike animals, plants do not eat food.

                                                                            10.2.1 Leaves: the ̒ food factories ̓ of plants
                                                                            Plants store food in the form of starch, a type of carbohydrate.
                                                                            This starch is produced in the leaves of a plant which, by design,
                                                                            are generally broad and ﬂat. These are mostly green because of
                                                                            the presence of a green pigment called chlorophyll, that helps in
                                                                            capturing sunlight eﬃciently.
 Curiosity | Textbook of Science | Grade 7




                                                                               Let us ﬁnd out the role chlorophyll plays in the preparation of
                                                                            food in the form of starch in plants.

                                               Test                           Activity 10.2: Let us check (demonstration activity)
                                               tube
                                              Water                                                                      The teacher may demonstrate this
                                             Alcohol                                                                     activity.
                                               Leaf
                                                                                                                           Keep a leaf in boiling water for
                                              Wire                                                                           ﬁve minutes to soften it.
                                              gauze
                                                                               Iodine
                                                                                                                              Dip this leaf in a test tube
                                                                                                                               containing alcohol.
                                                                              solution




                                             Sprit lamp
                                                                                                                              Place the test tube in a beaker
                                                                                                                               containing     boiling   water.
                                                       (a) Boiling set-up                (b) Iodine test                       Wait until the leaf becomes
                                                                 Fig. 10.2: Starch test in a leaf                              colourless (Fig. 10.2a).

140

                                                                                                           Reprint 2026-27


Chapter 10.indd 140                                                                                                                                              4/3/2025 4:55:48 PM
                                                                                                        141
                        Take out the leaf and place it on a plate.
                        Now, put a few drops of diluted iodine solution with the help
                         of a dropper on the decolourised leaf (Fig. 10.2b). Wait for a




                                                                                                          Life Processes in Plants
                         few minutes and observe.
                        If the colour of the leaf changes to blue-black, it indicates the
                         presence of starch.
                      Caution — Alcohol should never be placed near a heat source directly,
                      as it is highly ﬂammable and can easily lead to ﬁre and burns.



                         Did you wonder why we decolourise the leaf in the
                         beginning of this activity?
                                                                                     DIVE
                                                                                      EEPER

                         Decolourisation of a leaf enables us to easily observe
                         colour change and, thus, the presence of starch.


                         In Activity 10.1, we have learnt that water and sunlight are
                      essential for plant growth. In Activity 10.2, we have discovered
                      that green leaves store starch as food.
                         Bhaskar loves gardening during his free time. Being a curious
                      student, he often looks around his garden and wonders how
                      plants produce food. From his experiences, Bhaskar knows
                      that water and sunlight are essential for plant growth. But he
                      wonders if sunlight contributes to the production of food in the
                      form of starch in plants.



                                    How does sunlight
                               contribute in the production
                                   of starch in plants?



                        Activity 10.3: Let us check

                      Bhaskar took a leaf having both green and non-green patches
                      from each of two similar potted plants — one kept in sunlight and
                      the other kept in the dark for 36 hours. He wanted to compare
                      the leaves before and after the starch test.
                         He made a sketch of the leaves to record the location of the
                      green and the non-green patches on them with the help of a
                      tracing paper. After that, he performed an iodine test (as shown
                      in Activity 10.2) on the leaves. Bhaskar recorded his observations
                      in Table 10.2.



                                                          Reprint 2026-27


Chapter 10.indd 141                                                                           4/3/2025 4:55:49 PM
                                             Table 10.2: Presence of starch in green and non-green parts of the
                                                         leaves of plants

                                             S.No. Light conditions for          Initial colours        Final colours after
                                                       potted plant             before iodine test          iodine test

                                               1.   Plant kept in sunlight     Green and                Green
                                                                               non-green                patches of
                                                                               patches on               leaf turned
                                                                               the leaf                 blue-black




                                               2.   Plant kept in the dark Green and                   No change in
                                                                           non-green                   colour
                                                                           patches on
                                                                           the leaf




                                                        In Table 10.2, Bhaskar recorded a blue-black colour (indicating
                                                     the presence of starch) on the green patches of the leaf obtained
                                                     from the plant placed in sunlight. Bhaskar also recorded that the
                                                     leaf obtained from the plant kept in the dark does not show a
                                                     blue-black colour, even on the green patches, indicating that no
                                                     starch has been produced. Non-green patches of the leaf obtained
                                                     from the plant placed in sunlight do not turn blue-black. Does it
                                                     indicate that there is no chlorophyll present in those patches?
 Curiosity | Textbook of Science | Grade 7




                                                     The non-green patches may not have suﬃcient chlorophyll to
                                                     prepare enough starch to be detected using the iodine test.



                                                                             FASCINATING FACTS
                                                                             Some plant leaves appear red, violet,
                                                                             or brown because they contain more
                                                                             of these coloured pigments than the
                                                                             green-coloured chlorophyll. This hides
                                                                             the green colour. Some of these pigments
                                                                             also help in photosynthesis. You can use
                                                                             an iodine test to check for the presence
                                                                             of starch in these leaves, indicating that
                                                                             photosynthesis has indeed taken place.



142

                                                                               Reprint 2026-27


Chapter 10.indd 142                                                                                                           4/3/2025 4:55:50 PM
                                                                                                                              143
                         What do we infer from the observations listed in Table 10.2?
                      As we know, leaves are mostly green because of the presence
                      of chlorophyll. We have also seen that the starch is produced




                                                                                                                                Life Processes in Plants
                      where green patches of the leaf are present. We can infer that
                      chlorophyll helps in preparing starch in the presence of sunlight.
                      In fact, it is essential for the preparation of starch. Hence, the
                      leaves are also called ‘food factories’ of plants.
                         What else is essential for the preparation of food in plants?
                      Let us ﬁnd out.

                      10.2.2 Role of air in the preparation of food

                                        While reading contributions of
                                        scientists in plant nutrition, my sister
                                        told me that air plays a role in the
                                        process of food preparation in plants.


                                                            Which gas from the air is
                                                            essential in the process of
                                                            food preparation in plants?




                         Activity 10.4: Let us experiment
                             (demonstration activity)

                      The teacher may demonstrate this activity.
                        Take a potted green plant and keep it in the                                       Destarched
                                                                                                              plant
                          dark for two to three days to allow it to destarch
                          (i.e., lose any stored starch). Then, locate one
                                                                                                              Sodium
                          leaf of this plant for this experiment.                                            hydroxide
                        Take a wide-mouthed bottle and pour some                                             solution
                         caustic soda (sodium hydroxide) into it
                         (caustic soda absorbs carbon dioxide from
                         the air).                                                       (a) The set-up
                      Caution — Caustic soda is a strong chemical that can
                      cause skin burns; only teachers should handle it.
                        Insert half of the destarched leaf into the
                         bottle through a split cork, leaving the other
                         half of the leaf outside, and place the bottle as          (b) Iodine test on the leaf
                         shown in Fig. 10.3a.
                                                                                   Fig. 10.3: Testing the role of
                                                                                        chlorophyll and air




                                                            Reprint 2026-27


Chapter 10.indd 143                                                                                                 4/3/2025 4:55:51 PM
                                                                  Place the set-up in sunlight for a few hours.
                                                                  Observe and record the availability of water, sunlight,
                                                                   chlorophyll, and carbon dioxide in Table 10.3.
                                                                  Remove the leaf and test it for starch using the iodine test, as
                                                                   was done in Activity 10.2.
                                                                  Record your observations in Table 10.3.

                                             Table 10.3: Role of air in the preparation of starch by plants

                                                                                    Availability of
                                                                                                                           Starch
                                              Part of the                                                                 present
                                                 leaf                                                       Carbon
                                                                    Water       Sunlight     Chlorophyll                  (Yes/No)
                                                                                                            dioxide

                                             Part of the
                                             leaf inside the
                                             bottle

                                             Part of the leaf
                                             outside the
                                             bottle

                                                                    We notice that the part of the leaf that was outside the bottle
                                                                turns blue-black, indicating the presence of starch. However, the
                                                                part of the leaf inside the bottle does not turn blue-black in colour,
                                                                indicating that food is not made in that part of the leaf. This is
                                                                because the caustic soda solution inside the ﬂask absorbs the
                                                                carbon dioxide present in the air. What does this experiment show?
                                                                    This experiment shows that carbon dioxide present in the air
                                                                is essential for plants to prepare starch.
 Curiosity | Textbook of Science | Grade 7




                                                                    Based on Activities 10.3 and 10.4, what do you conclude?
                                                                Which part of the plant is involved in the synthesis of starch?
                                                                    Based on our learnings so far, we have found that sunlight,
                                                                water, chlorophyll and carbon dioxide are essential for the
                                                                synthesis of food in plants. This process by which plants prepare
                                                                food in the presence of sunlight and chlorophyll is called
                                                                photosynthesis. A leaf is the primary site for photosynthesis. Do
                                                                other green parts of the plant also perform photosynthesis? Yes,
                                                                other parts of the plants which have chlorophyll also perform
                                                                photosynthesis.
                                                                    So far, we have learnt that plants take in carbon dioxide from
                                                                the air and water, and use sunlight to prepare their food by the
                                                                process of photosynthesis. But have you ever thought about what
                                                                more happens during this process? Do plants only take in


144

                                                                                     Reprint 2026-27


Chapter 10.indd 144                                                                                                                      4/3/2025 4:55:51 PM
                                                                                                                                145
                      substances from their surroundings, or do they also release
                      something? Let us explore this through an experiment performed
                      by Barkha didi.




                                                                                                                                  Life Processes in Plants
                        Activity 10.5: Let us explore

                        Look at Fig. 10.4. Compare the
                                                                             A                                  B
                         two set-ups labelled as A and B,
                         and analyse.
                        In Fig. 10.4, set-up A is placed in                              Air bubbles
                         sunlight, and set-up B is placed in                                 Beaker
                         the dark. What diﬀerence do you                                  Inverted
                         observe in the two set-ups? Do                                   test tube
                         you observe air bubbles emerging                                  Funnel
                         in the inverted test tube in set-up                             Water plant
                         A? The gas produced in this set-up
                         caused bubbles to emerge and get
                                                                            Fig. 10.4: Activity showing the release
                         accumulated in the inverted test
                                                                               of oxygen during photosynthesis
                         tube. Which gas is this?



                               Oh yes! I remember. In our science lab, I
                               have seen a similar set-up placed under
                               sunlight near a window.



                                         When suﬃcient gas was accumulated in the
                                         inverted test tube, Barkha didi placed her
                                         thumb on the mouth of the test tube while
                                         taking the test tube oﬀ the set-up. She then
                                         quickly inserted a lit matchstick into the tube
                                         and the matchstick produced an intense ﬂame.



                            She inferred that the gas in the test tube is rich in
                            oxygen. It indicates that oxygen is released during
                            the process of photosynthesis. It also indicates that
                            photosynthesis occurs in the presence of sunlight.



                         Based on Barkha didi’s experiment, we can conclude that
                      oxygen is released during photosynthesis.




                                                          Reprint 2026-27


Chapter 10.indd 145                                                                                                   4/3/2025 4:55:53 PM
                                                                                                  10.2.3 Photosynthesis: in a
                                                                                                  nutshell
                                                                              Carbohydrates
                                                                                (Glucose)         We know that water, sunlight, carbon
                                                   Light energy
                                                                                                  dioxide from the air, and chlorophyll
                                             Chlorophyll                                          are necessary to carry out the process
                                              pigment                                             of photosynthesis that produces
                                                                                    Oxygen
                                                                                                  carbohydrates (Fig. 10.5). During
                                               Carbon
                                               dioxide                                            photosynthesis,     food     is  actually
                                                                                                  produced in the form of glucose, a
                                              Water and                                           simple carbohydrate. This glucose not
                                              minerals                                            only serves as an instant source of
                                                                                                  energy but also later gets converted into
                                                                                                  starch for storage. The word equation
                                                            Fig. 10.5: A diagram showing          of photosynthesis is given below —
                                                                    photosynthesis


                                                                                                             Sunlight
                                                                          Carbon dioxide + Water                        Glucose + Oxygen
                                                                                                        Chlorophyll


                                                     KNOW A SCIENTIST
                                                     Many scientists across the world contributed to develop an
                                                     understanding of photosynthesis. In India, Rustom Hormusji Dastur
                                                                   (1896–1961) studied the process of photosynthesis.
                                                                   He was a plant scientist and served as the head of the
                                                                   Botany Department at the Royal Institute of Science,
                                                                   Bombay (now the Institute of Science, Mumbai), from
                                                                   1921–1935. He studied eﬀects of the amount of water
 Curiosity | Textbook of Science | Grade 7




                                                                   and temperature on photosynthesis. He examined the
                                                                   importance of water, temperature, and the colour of
                                                                   light in the process of photosynthesis.



                                                                    10.2.4 How do leaves exchange gases during
                                                                    photosynthesis?
                                                                    We now know that photosynthesis requires carbon dioxide, and
                                                                    oxygen is released in the process. Which part of the plant helps in
                                                                    the exchange of carbon dioxide and oxygen? Let us conduct an
                                                                    activity to understand where the exchange of gases takes place.




146

                                                                                           Reprint 2026-27


Chapter 10.indd 146                                                                                                                           4/3/2025 4:55:54 PM
                                                                                                                             147

                          Activity 10.6: Let us examine
                            (demonstration activity)




                                                                                                                               Life Processes in Plants
                      The teacher may demonstrate this activity.
                                                                                         Stomata
                        Collect a leaf from a plant such as rhoeo,
                          money plant, onion, hibiscus, coleus, or
                          any grass.
                        Put it in a beaker ﬁlled with water.
                        Carefully peel a thin layer from the lower
                         surface of the leaf.
                        Place the peel in a watch glass with water.
                        Now, take a microscope slide and
                         carefully put a drop of water on it.
                        Using forceps, transfer the peel of the leaf
                         from the watch glass to the slide with the
                         help of forceps.
                        Put a drop of ink on the leaf peel with the                                      0.1 mm

                         help of a dropper.
                                                                            Fig. 10.6: Stomata on the lower
                        Cover the peel with a coverslip and                     surface of a rhoeo leaf
                         observe it under a microscope.
                          What do you observe? Do you notice tiny
                      pores on the peel, as shown in Fig. 10.6?
                      These pores are called stomata. Stomata, present on the surface
                      of leaves, help in the exchange of gases.

                       10.3 Transport in Plants

                       10.3.1 Transport of water and minerals
                      All living beings need water to grow. Plants use water in the
                      process of photosynthesis. Water, along with minerals present in
                      the soil, is taken up by the roots of a plant. Minerals are important
                      nutrients for the growth of plants. How do water and minerals
                      taken up by the roots move to all parts of the plant?
                         We can study water transport in plants by carrying out an
                      activity. For this activity, we require two glass tumblers, some
                      water, red ink, and twigs of two similar tender plants, preferably
                      with white-coloured ﬂowers (for example, white sadabahar,
                      balsam), as shown in Fig. 10.7.




                                                          Reprint 2026-27


Chapter 10.indd 147                                                                                                4/3/2025 4:55:54 PM
                                                                        Activity 10.7: Let us experiment

                                                                                            Take two tumblers and label them A and B.
                                                                                            Fill one-third of each tumbler with water.
                                                                                            Add a few drops of red ink to tumbler B.
                                                                                            Obliquely cut the stems of both plants at their
                                                                                              base while keeping them inside the water and
                                                                                              immediately place one plant in each tumbler,
                                                                                              as shown in Fig. 10.7a and Fig. 10.7b.
                                                                                            Observe these plants the next day.
                                                       A              B
                                                                                              What do you notice? Compare the plant
                                             (a) With water      (b) With coloured water
                                                                                          stems placed in the tumblers. Do you observe
                                             plant twigs placed in water with different
                                                              treatments
                                                                                          red colour in the stem, leaves, and ﬂowers of the
                                                                                          plant from Tumbler B? Fig. 10.7c and Fig. 10.7d
                                                                                          show the plants after one day. Compare the plant
                                                                                          in Fig. 10.7c with that in Fig. 10.7d. A red colour
                                                                                          is visible in the stem, leaves, and ﬂowers of the
                                                                                          plant in Fig. 10.7d. How did diﬀerent parts of the
                                                                                          plant acquire this red colour?
                                                                                              Cut the stem from the upper part of the plant
                                                         A                  B             that is not immersed in the red-coloured water.
                                              (c) With water     (d) With coloured water
                                                                                          Observe the cut stem using a magnifying glass. Do
                                                       plant twigs after one day
                                                                                          you spot the red colour in the stem (Fig. 10.7e)?
                                                                                          How does the red colour ink move upwards? This
                                                                                 Phloem is due to the thin tube-like structure called the
                                                                                   Xylem xylem present in the stem, branches, and leaves
                                                     Cut                                  of plants. Just like red ink, minerals dissolved in
                                                                                          water also move up the stem through the xylem.
 Curiosity | Textbook of Science | Grade 7




                                                                                              Now, we know that water and minerals are
                                              (e) Enlarged view of cut end of the twig
                                                                                          transported to the leaves and other parts of
                                                 Fig. 10.7: Experiment to check for       plants through the xylem (Fig. 10.8). The water
                                                   water transportation in plants
                                                                                          transported through the xylem is used to perform
                                                Food transport                           various functions. How does food get transported
                                               through phloem                            to other parts of a plant?

                                                                                     10.3.2 Transport of food
                                              Water transport
                                                                                     We know that leaves are the primary site for
                                              through xylem                          photosynthesis. The food prepared by plants in the
                                                                                     leaves is transported to all parts of the plant. This
                                                                                     food is transported through another set of thin
                                                                                     tube-like structures called the phloem (Fig. 10.8).
                                                                                     The transported food may also be stored in some
                                                    Fig. 10.8: Transport of water
                                                       and minerals in a plant       other parts of a plant, such as seeds and roots.

148

                                                                                          Reprint 2026-27


Chapter 10.indd 148                                                                                                                             4/3/2025 4:55:55 PM
                                                                                                                               149

                        10.4 Do Plants Respire?




                                                                                                                                 Life Processes in Plants
                      In the Grade 6 Science textbook Curiosity, chapter ‘Living
                      Creatures: Exploring their Characteristics’, you learnt that all
                      living beings respire. Do plants also respire like we do?

                         Activity 10.8: Let us ﬁnd out
                          (demonstration activity)

                         Soak some moong bean seeds in water overnight.
                         Put a layer of cotton in a conical ﬂask (Fig. 10.9) and moisten
                           the cotton with water to keep it wet.
                         Place the soaked seeds over the wet cotton in the conical ﬂask.
                         Cover the mouth of the conical ﬂask with
                           a cork having two holes.
                                                                               Tube A                      Lime water
                         Fit two tubes A and B through the two
                           holes on the cork, as shown in Fig. 10.9.
                         Leave it undisturbed for 24 hours in
                           the dark.                                    Tube B
                         Take two test tubes and ﬁll them with          Germinating
                           lime water.                                      seeds
                         Cover the mouth of one test tube with a
                           cork having one hole in it.
                         Dip one glass tube in the test tube               Fig. 10.9: Set-up to test respiration in plants
                           through a hole in the cork.
                         Connect the ﬂask and test tube with a rubber pipe as shown
                           in Fig. 10.9.
                          Compare both the test tubes for any change in colour. Does
                      the lime water turn milky in both the test tubes? Why does the
                      lime water turn milky in the test tube connected to the ﬂask?
                      Lime water turns milky due to the presence of more carbon
                      dioxide in the ﬂask. But where does this carbon dioxide come
                      from? As we know, carbon dioxide is naturally present in very
                      small quantities in the air. In the ﬂask, additional carbon dioxide
                      is produced by the seeds as they respire.
                          During respiration, glucose is broken down in the presence of
                      oxygen, releasing carbon dioxide, water, and energy. The word
                      equation for the proccess of respiration, is as follows —
                         Glucose + Oxygen                  Carbon dioxide + Water + Energy
                         The energy produced during respiration is used by plants
                      for their growth and development. All parts of a plant, green or
                      non-green, carry out respiration.
                         Thus, plants have diﬀerent mechanisms for synthesising,
                      transporting, and utilising food to get energy.


                                                              Reprint 2026-27


Chapter 10.indd 149                                                                                                  4/3/2025 4:55:55 PM
                                                                     In a Nutshell

                                                                      All living organisms require food that provide energy for
                                                                       their growth and development.
                                                                      Plants use carbon dioxide and water in the presence of
                                                                       sunlight and chlorophyll to produce glucose and oxygen.
                                                                       This process of synthesis of food is known as photosynthesis.
                                                                      Leaves are the ̒ food factories ̓ of a plant.
                                                                      Tiny pores on the surface of leaves, called stomata, help
                                                                       in the exchange of oxygen and carbon dioxide during
                                                                       photosynthesis and respiration.
                                                                      The xylem transports water and minerals from roots, while
                                                                       the phloem carries food from leaves to all parts of the plants.
                                                                      Plants break down glucose and release energy by a process
                                                                       called respiration. They use oxygen and release carbon
                                                                       dioxide in this process.

                                                                     Let Us Enhance Our Learning

                                                                     1. Complete the following table
                                                                         S.No.        Feature              Photosynthesis   Respiration
                                             ENQUIRY
                                                                            1.    Raw materials

                                                                            2.    Products



                                                 ?
                                                                            3.    Word equation
 Curiosity | Textbook of Science | Grade 7




                                                                           4.     Importance

                                              WHY        WHAT IF
                                                                     2. Imagine a situation where all the organisms that carry out
                                                                        photosynthesis on the earth have disappeared. What would
                                                 WHERE         W        be the impact of this on living organisms?
                                                               H
                                                               E     3. A potato slice shows the presence of starch with iodine
                                                               N        solution. Where does the starch in potatoes come from?
                                             H     WHAT
                                             O     COULD
                                             W                          Where is the food synthesised in the plant, and how does it
                                             L
                                                               CAN      reach the potato?
                                             O             ?    IT
                                                   W                 4. Does the broad and ﬂat structure of leaves make plants more
                                             N     H
                                             G     I                    eﬃcient for photosynthesis? Justify your answer.
                                                   C       WHOSE
                                                   H
                                                                     5. X is broken down using Y to release carbon dioxide, Z, and
                                             WE
                                             H L     WHAT WILL          energy.
                                             A S      HAPPEN
                                             T E                                  X+Y           Carbon dioxide + Z + Energy
                                              WHY         WHAT
                                              NOT        SHOULD         X, Y, and Z are three diﬀerent components of the process.

150                                                                     What do X, Y, and Z stand for?


                                                                                         Reprint 2026-27


Chapter 10.indd 150                                                                                                                       4/3/2025 4:55:56 PM
                                                                                                                                        151
                       6. Krishna set-up an experiment with two potted plants of same
                          size and placed one of them in sunlight and the other in a
                          dark room, as shown in Fig. 10.10.




                                                                                                                                          Life Processes in Plants
                           Answer the following questions —
                           (i) What idea might she be testing                                                   INNOVATION
                               through this experiment?
                           (ii) What are the visible diﬀerences                                                   DISCOVERY
                                in plants in both the conditions?
                          (iii) According to you, leaves of which                                                 ENQUIRY
                                plants conﬁrm the iodine test for (a) Sunlight (b) Complete dark
                                the presence of starch?             Fig. 10.10: Experimental pots
                                                                                                                EXPLORATION
                       7. Vani believes that ‘carbon dioxide is essential for
                          photosynthesis’. She puts an experimental set-up, as shown
                          in Fig. 10.11, to collect evidence to support or reject her idea.                       CURIOSITY




                      (a) Sunlight with     (b) Sunlight           (c) Dark with       (d) Dark without
                       carbon dioxide      without carbon         carbon dioxide        carbon dioxide
                                               dioxide
                             Fig. 10.11: A potted plant with sufficient water is placed under the
                                                    prescribed conditions
                           Answer the following questions —
                            (i) In which plant(s) in the above set-up(s) will starch
                                be formed?
                           (ii) In which plant(s) in the above set-up(s) will starch
                                not be formed?
                          (iii) In which plant(s) in the above set-up(s) will oxygen
                                be generated?                                                                               Water +
                                                                                                        Water
                          (iv) In which plant(s) in the above set-up(s) will oxygen                       +                 Water
                                not be generated?                                                       Snail                plant
                       8. Ananya took four test tubes and ﬁlled three-fourth of                     A                B
                           each test tube with water. She labelled them A, B, C, and
                           D (Fig. 10.12). In test tube A, she kept a snail; in test tube B,
                           she kept a water plant; in test tube C, she kept both a snail
                           and a plant. In test tube D, she kept only water. Ananya
                           added a carbon dioxide indicator to all the test tubes. She
                                                                                                        Water +
                           recorded the initial colour of water and observed if there                   Snail +
                           are any colour changes in the test tubes after 2–3 hours.                    Water                 Water
                           What do you think she wants to ﬁnd out? How will she                          plant
                           know if she is correct?                                                  C                D
                                                                                               Fig. 10.12: Experimental set-up

                                                                Reprint 2026-27


Chapter 10.indd 151                                                                                                           4/3/2025 4:55:58 PM
                                                                                 9. Design an experiment to observe if water transportation in
                                                                                    plants is quicker in warm or cold conditions.
                                                                                10. Photosynthesis and respiration are essential to maintain
                                                                                    balance in nature. Discuss.

                                                                                  Exploratory Projects
                                                          Disciplinary




                                                                                  Develop a bottle garden by
                                                                                   planting a growing plant like
                                                                                   spider plant or jade plant in
                                                History                  Art       a large transparent bottle
                                                                                   (Fig. 10.13). After growing the
                                                                                   plant properly for some time,
                                                                                   seal the mouth of the bottle.
                                             Geography                   Society   Observe the growth of the             Fig. 10.13: Bottle garden
                                                                                   plant. If the plant is growing well that means the plant is
                                                                                   maintaining the exchange of gases, that is, carbon dioxide
                                                                                   produced in the process of respiration of the plant is utilised
                                             Technology                  Economy   for performing photosynthesis, and oxygen generated in
                                                                                   photosynthesis is utilised in respiration by the plant inside
                                                                                   the bottle.
                                                          Inter




                                                                                  How are plant processes like photosynthesis, respiration, and
                                                                                   water and food transportation crucial for crop production?
                                                                                  Visit a greenhouse, if there is one near your place. Observe
                                                                                   how people grow plants in a green house. Find out how they
                                                                                   regulate the amount of light, water, and carbon dioxide used
                                                                                   to grow plants.
 Curiosity | Textbook of Science | Grade 7




                                                            KNOW A SCIENTIST
                                                            Kamala Sohonie (1911–1998) was a woman scientist of India. She
                                                            received a Ph.D. degree for her remarkable contribution in the area of
                                                                                  respiration in plants from Cambridge University.
                                                                                  She returned to India and worked at the Lady
                                                                                  Hardinge Medical College in New Delhi, and later
                                                                                  at the Nutrition Research Laboratory, Coonoor.
                                                                                  Thereafter, she moved to the then Royal Institute
                                                                                  of Science, Bombay, where she was eventually
                                                                                  appointed as Director. Much of her work helped
                                                                                  improve the nutritive values of plant foods. She
                                                                                  also worked on the sap of the coconut palm as a
                                                                                  nutritive drink called Neera.




152

                                                                                                    Reprint 2026-27


Chapter 10.indd 152                                                                                                                                  4/3/2025 4:55:59 PM
