                                                                                                                     1



                                                                                                           CHAPTER
                   Geographical Diversity
                   of India
                          To us, by its very geography, the country [India] appears to
                          be quite distinct from other countries, and that itself gives
                          it a certain national character.
                          				                                                   — Sri Aurobindo


                   Fig. 1.1. Jog Falls in Karnataka. Notice the plateau and the waterfalls. The power of the waterfall
                        is converted into electricity (hydroelectricity; ‘hydro’ means water) through special turbines.




                                                                                                                          India and the World: Land and the People
                                                                                                                          1 –Geographical Diversity of India




                                                     1.    What are some key
                   The   Big                               geographical features
                      Questions                            of India?
                                                     2.    How does India’s geographical
                                                           diversity affect our lives?

                                                                                                                                    1




                                                               Reprint 2026-27


Chapter 1.indd 1                                                                                                                         08-04-2025 11:30:22
                                                                          In 1984, Rakesh Sharma, the first Indian astronaut to go into
                                                                          space, spoke with the then Prime Minister of India, Indira
                                                                          Gandhi. When she asked him, “How does India look from
                                                                          space?”, he replied, “Sāre jahān se achchha” — better than the
                                                                          whole world. (This is the title of a well-known poem of the early
                                                                          20th century.)

                                                                          LET’S EXPLORE
                                                                          Look at the map of India at the end of this book. What are
                                                                          you able to observe? Recall your lesson on different types
                                                                          of landforms — mountains, plains and plateaus. Which
                                                                          landforms can you identify on the map? What do the different
                                                                          colours on the map mean? (Hint: The legend on the map shows
                                                                          the heights of each area.)

                                                                          As you go through this chapter, remember to refer periodically
                                                                          to the physical map.
                                                                          India is the seventh-largest country in the world, and a part of
                                                                          Asia. Along with its neighbours — Pakistan, Bangladesh, Nepal,
                                                                          Bhutan, Sri Lanka, and Myanmar — it forms the region known
                                                                          as the Indian Subcontinent (subcontinent, since it is part of
                                                                          the continent of Asia). Often, for the purpose of discussion, we
                                                                          refer to five regions — the great mountain zone, the plains of the
                   Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 1




                                                                          Ganga and the Indus, the desert region, the southern peninsula,
                                                                          and the islands. In this chapter, we will ‘fly’ over these zones,
                                                                          providing you with a bird’s-eye view of these features and
                                                                          offering glimpses of what things look like in close-up at some of
                                                                          these places. It would be difficult to go into all the details at this
                                                                          stage since, as you will soon see, India is large and diverse.
                                                                          The Himalayan Mountain range stands as a natural barrier in
                                                                          the north, while the Thar Desert and the Arabian Sea mark its
                                                                          western limits. To the south, the Indian Ocean and to the east,
                                                                          the Bay of Bengal form a natural boundary. These geographical
                                                                          features create a separation between India and the rest of the
                                                                          continent and have played a crucial role in shaping India’s
                     2                                                    climate, culture, and history.




                                                                                              Reprint 2026-27


Chapter 1.indd 2                                                                                                                                   08-04-2025 11:30:23
                    LET’S EXPLORE
                    Æ     Do you recall your lesson on latitudes and longitudes?
                          Look at the map. Can you read, approximately, the latitude
                          and longitude where India lies?
                    Æ     Identify the above features on India’s physical map.

                   Let us now journey together from the Himalayas to the islands
                   in the Indian Ocean, and onward to the east of India. The diverse
                   colours on the map already give us a sense of the geographical
                   diversity. Familiarise yourself with the legend on the map. The
                   different colours indicate the altitudes.

                   The Himalayas
                   Look at the length of the Himalayan Range on the map. It is like
                   a massive wall. From the legend, can you guess the altitude at
                   different points of the Himalayas?




                                                                                                     India and the World: Land and the People
                                                                                                     1 –Geographical Diversity of India




                        Fig. 1.2. These are satellite images of the Himalayan range. Note that the
                                           length of the range is about 2500 km.                               3




                                                              Reprint 2026-27


Chapter 1.indd 3                                                                                                    08-04-2025 11:30:24
                                                                          LET’S REMEMBER
                                                                          The Himalayas seem to touch the sky. In fact, many of its peaks
                                                                          are over 8000 metres in height and are together called the
                                                                          ‘Eight Thousanders’. This mountain range stretches across six
                                                                          countries in Asia: India, Nepal, Bhutan, China, Pakistan, and
                                                                          Afghanistan. Can you name the highest mountain in the world?

                                                                          In the summer, the snow on the mountains melts and feeds
                                                                          major rivers, such as the Ganga, Indus, and Brahmaputra. These
                                                                          rivers and their tributaries provide water for drinking, farming,
                                                                          and industrial use, connecting with the lives of hundreds of
                                                                          millions of people. Hence, the Himalayas are sometimes called
                                                                          the ‘Water Tower of Asia’. The Himalayas are also important to
                                                                          many cultures and belief systems. The mountains themselves
                                                                          are considered sacred, and temples and monasteries have been
                                                                          built within them, attracting monks and spiritual seekers from
                                                                          around the world who come to pray and meditate.

                                                                          DON’T MISS OUT
                                                                          The Bhagirathi River, a major tributary of the Ganga, originates
                                                                          from Gaumukh (‘Cow’s Mouth’), in Uttarakhand. It is the edge
                   Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 1




                                                                                                  Fig. 1.3. Gaumukh

                                                                          of the Gangotri Glacier. This glacier is one of the largest in the
                                                                          Indian Himalayas. It is considered sacred and attracts many
                                                                          pilgrims. Gaumukh is also a popular trekking destination. Next
                                                                          time you see the Ganga, remember — its journey began there!
                     4




                                                                                              Reprint 2026-27


Chapter 1.indd 4                                                                                                                               08-04-2025 11:30:25
                   How the Himalayas were formed ...
                   an interesting story
                   A long, long time ago, India was part of a much
                   bigger landmass called ‘Gondwana’, where its
                   neighbour was Africa! At some point, it broke
                   away and slowly started moving north. About
                   50 million years ago, it reached the landmass
                   of Eurasia and collided with it. As India pushed
                   against Eurasia, the land between them
                   crumpled and rose up — just like how a carpet
                   wrinkles when you push it. That’s how the
                   mighty Himalayan mountains were formed!
                   Amazingly, India is still pushing into Asia
                   today, very slowly — about five centimetres
                   each year, which is much slower than the rate
                   at which your hair grows. This means the
                   Himalayas are still growing taller, just a tiny bit
                   each year — about five millimetres, but over a
                                                                                Fig. 1.4. India’s journey
                   millennium, that adds up to five metres!                            to Eurasia




                                                                                                            India and the World: Land and the People
                                                                                                            1 –Geographical Diversity of India




                                    Fig. 1.5. Folded layers of Himalayan rock


                     DON’T MISS OUT
                    The word ‘Himalaya’ is a combination of two Sanskrit
                    words — hima, meaning ‘snow’, and ālaya, meaning ‘abode’ or
                    ‘dwelling’ — thus, ‘abode of snow’.
                                                                                                                      5




                                                           Reprint 2026-27


Chapter 1.indd 5                                                                                                           08-04-2025 11:30:26
                                                                             The Himalayas are broadly categorised into three main ranges:
                                                                                 The Himadri (the Greater Himalayas) are the highest and
                                                                                  most rugged part of the range, home to towering peaks like
                                                                                  Mount Everest and Kanchenjunga. This region remains
                                                                                  snow-covered throughout the year. Life here is tough, and
                                                                                  there are not many human settlements.
                                                                                 The Himachal (the Lower Himalayas) lie south of the
                                                                                  Greater Himalayas and have a more moderate climate,
                                                                                  allowing rich biodiversity and human habitation. Popular
                                                                                  hill stations, such as Nainital (Uttarakhand), Darjeeling
                                                                                  (West Bengal), Shimla (Himachal Pradesh), and Mussoorie
                                                                                  (Uttarakhand), are located in this region.
                                                                                 The Shivalik Hills (the Outer Himalayas) form the
                                                                                  outermost and lowest range, consisting of rolling hills and
                                                                                  dense forests. These foothills are rich in wildlife, serving as
                                                                                  a transition zone between the Himalayas and the Gangetic
                                                                                  Plains (also called the Northern Plains).

                                                                             LET’S EXPLORE
                                                                             Can you locate the names of the states in the different parts
                                                                             of the Himalayas? Take the help of both the physical and
                                                                             political maps for this exercise.
                   Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 1




                                                                             ​DON’T MISS OUT
                                                                                                                         The       traditional     house
                                                                                                                         construction method in the
                                                                                                                         western Himalayan region is
                                                                                                                         known as ‘kath-kuni’ or ‘dhajji-
                                                                                                                         dewari’ style of houses. A
                                                                                                                         combination of locally available
                                                                                                                         stone and wood is used, which
                                                                                                                         not only keeps the house warm
                                                                                                                         but also resists damage in the
                                                                          Fig. 1.6. Kath-kuni House,                     event of mild earthquakes.
                                                                              Himachal Pradesh
                     6




                                                                                                       Reprint 2026-27


Chapter 1.indd 6                                                                                                                                            08-04-2025 11:30:26
                      DON’T MISS OUT
                     The Great Himalayan National Park in Himachal Pradesh has a
                     wide diversity of flora and fauna. The park has been declared

                     1




                     2                                                                                 3




                     4                                                                                 5




                     6                                                                                 7     India and the World: Land and the People
                                                                                                             1 –Geographical Diversity of India




                      Fig. 1.7. 1.Great Himalayan National Park Conservation Area. 2. Himalayan monal
                      (male). 3. A monastery in Ladakh. 4. The Beas river in Himachal Pradesh. 5. Snow
                   Leopard 6. A display of produce in a local market in the Himalayas. 7. Rhododendron — a
                                           type of sherbet is made out of this flower.
                                                                                                                       7




                                                             Reprint 2026-27


Chapter 1.indd 7                                                                                                            08-04-2025 11:30:31
                                                                               a World Heritage Site by UNESCO. The biodiversity of the park
                                                                               is being preserved by the government as well as the village
                                                                               communities that live inside the park.



                                                                               The cold desert of India
                                                                               The word ‘desert’ immediately evokes an image of a hot place.
                                                                               However, there are also cold deserts, and we have one in India.
                                                                               Ladakh is a cold desert where winter temperatures drop below
                                                                               –30°C. There is very little rainfall, and the landscape is rugged,
                                                                                                                     with rocky terrain, deep
                                                                                                                     valleys, and lakes such as
                                                                                                                     Pangong Tso (tso means lake).
                                                                                                                         The terrain here resembles
                                                                                                                         that of the moon; hence, it is
                                                                                                                         called ‘moonland’. Geologists
                                                                                                                         explain the formation of this
                                                                                                                         terrain, as we saw earlier, by
                                                                                                                         the fact that the mountains
                                                                                                                         were ‘folded’ when the
                                                                                                                         Indian landmass collided
                                                                                                                         with Eurasia. This folded
                                                                                                                         portion was part of an ocean,
                                                                            Fig. 1.8. Moonland, Ladakh
                                                                                                                         and so the rocks in this area
                   Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 1




                                                                           Fig. 1.9. Yaks are very important for the lives of people in the Himalayas. They
                     8                                                    are reared for their milk, meat, wool and dung, and are also used for transport.




                                                                                                      Reprint 2026-27


Chapter 1.indd 8                                                                                                                                              08-04-2025 11:30:31
                         Fig. 1.10. Pangong Tso, Ladakh. This lake has salty water, unlike most other lakes. The
                        saltiness is a result of the minerals that dissolve from the surrounding mountain areas.


                   are made largely of sand and clay. Wind and rain have eroded
                   the mountains into the shapes you see in the photograph.
                   Despite the harsh conditions, Ladakh is home to unique
                   wildlife like snow leopards, ibex, and Tibetan antelopes. The
                   Ladakhi people lead a simple life. The region is known for its
                   ancient monasteries and colourful festivals such as Losar and
                   the Hemis Festival.

                   The Gangetic Plains
                                                                                                                   India and the World: Land and the People
                   As we move southwards from the Himalayas, we reach the
                   vast and fertile Gangetic Plains. These plains have been an
                                                                                                                   1 –Geographical Diversity of India


                   important part of the history and civilisation of India. These
                   plains are nourished by mighty rivers originating from the
                   Himalayas, providing a vital lifeline: water. The Ganga, Indus,
                   and Brahmaputra river systems, along with their extensive
                   network of tributaries, enrich the soil with minerals, making the
                   region highly fertile and ideal for agriculture. The rivers bring
                   with them minerals that enrich the soil, enabling abundant
                   agriculture. The rivers are also a source for generating electricity.
                   A large proportion of India’s population lives in these plains.                                           9




                                                            Reprint 2026-27


Chapter 1.indd 9                                                                                                                  08-04-2025 11:30:32
                                                                      Fig. 1.11. Modern agricultural practices               Fig. 1.12. Aerial view of Delhi with the
                                                                                    in the plains                                   river Yamuna on top right




                                                                      Fig. 1.13. Multi-cropping in Uttar Pradesh             Fig. 1.14. Rural women working in a
                                                                                                                                   paddy field in West Bengal

                                                                                    The flat land of the Northern Plains has allowed for the
                                                                                    development of an elaborate transportation network. Road and
                                                                                    railway networks facilitate the movement of people and goods
               Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 1




                                                                                    over long distances. As you will see in the Tapestry of the Past
                                                                                    chapters, the Ganga, the Brahmaputra and other rivers have
                                                                                    been used for millennia for travel and trade.




               10                                                                        Fig. 1.15. Modes of transport in the Gangetic plains




                                                                                                           Reprint 2026-27


Chapter 1.indd 10                                                                                                                                                       08-04-2025 11:30:34
                      DON’T MISS OUT
                      Most rivers are named after goddesses — Ganga, Yamuna,
                      Kaveri, etc. The name of Brahmaputra, however, means ‘the
                      son of Brahma’. This river gets bigger during summer instead
                      of drying up! Can you guess why?


                     LET’S EXPLORE
                      Notice the concentration of lighting in the plains. What could
                      be the reason for this concentration?




                                    Fig. 1.16. Satellite image of the Gangetic plains



                                                                                                                India and the World: Land and the People
                                                                                                                1 –Geographical Diversity of India




                    Fig. 1.17. The Northern plains grey langur     Fig. 1.18. The majestic tiger that was on
                     sits on a wooden beam in Bandhavgarh          the verge of extinction. Project Tiger has
                          National Park, Madhya Pradesh             supported the return of the tiger to its
                                                                                    habitats.
                                                                                                                    11




                                                                 Reprint 2026-27


Chapter 1.indd 11                                                                                                              08-04-2025 11:30:35
                                                                      Fig. 1.19. The Indian gharial; an adult            Fig. 1.20. A peacock and peahen — the
                                                                        is between 2.5 and 4.5 m long. This               Indian peacock is our national bird
                                                                       reptile is on the verge of extinction.
                                                                      There are laws that prohibit harming
                                                                                   it or hunting it.


                                                                                     The Great Indian Desert or Thar Desert
                                                                                     If we move westward on the map, you will notice a yellowish
                                                                                     area. This area is the Thar Desert. What do you see? A vast stretch
                                                                                     of golden dunes, rugged terrain, and a wide-open sky?
               Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 1




                                                                                        Fig. 1.21. A traveller among the sand dunes of the Thar Desert.


                                                                                     LET’S EXPLORE
                                                                                     What is the shape of a sand dune? While mountains are
                                                                                     made of rock and their shape is fixed, why do you think sand
                                                                                     dunes also have a similar shape, even though they are made
                                                                                     of sand?
               12




                                                                                                            Reprint 2026-27


Chapter 1.indd 12                                                                                                                                                08-04-2025 11:30:37
                       Fig. 1.22. Jaisalmer, the ‘Golden City’, located in the middle of the Thar desert in
                                   India. The Jaisalmer fort is a UNESCO World Heritage site.


                    Sand dunes are formed when the wind shifts and shapes the
                    sand into hill-like formations. Sometimes these rise as high as
                    150 metres.
                    The Thar is a vast arid region. Most of it lies within India,
                    spanning the states of Rajasthan, Gujarat, Punjab, and Haryana.
                    The desert acts as a natural barrier due to the harsh conditions
                    that deter human and animal movement — including very high
                    daytime temperatures and cold nights, as well as a lack of access
                    to water.
                    People living in the Thar have adapted their way of life to the
                    place and what it offers; food habits, clothing and lifestyle are
                    suited to these harsh conditions.

                                                                                                              India and the World: Land and the People
                                                                                                              1 –Geographical Diversity of India




                        Fig. 1.23.
                           Camel
                       vendor at
                     the Pushkar
                         Mela (at
                      the edge of
                         the Thar
                          Desert)                                                                                 13




                                                               Reprint 2026-27


Chapter 1.indd 13                                                                                                            08-04-2025 11:30:41
                                                                      DON’T MISS OUT




                                                                      Fig. 1.24. (Left) Women fetching water from a source far away from home.
                                                                                   (Right) Rainwater harvesting structure in a hamlet.

                                                                      Water is scarce in the desert. Women often need to travel
                                                                      long distances every day to fetch water for their families. So,
                                                                      the traditional method for cleaning utensils is to scour them
                                                                      with sand until they are clean. A little water can be used for a
                                                                      light rinse. The water used for rinsing is reused for purposes
                                                                      like watering a plant. So, the next time you leave the tap
                                                                      running, remember the people of the Thar Desert. Rajasthan
                                                                      is also famous for its ingenious water conservation methods,
                                                                      including taanka or kunds. These are special water collection
                                                                      systems that store rainwater, often for drinking purposes.
               Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 1




                                                                      The Aravalli Hills
                                                                      LET’S EXPLORE
                                                                      Let’s go back to the map. Trace your path slowly from the
                                                                      Thar Desert towards the east. Do you see the Aravalli Hills?

                                                                      The Aravallis are among the oldest mountains in the world,
                                                                      some 2.5 billion years old! The range has many peaks and ridges.
                                                                      Although its highest peak, Mount Abu, towers at over 1700 m,
                                                                      most of its hills are between 300 and 900 metres high. Isn’t it
                                                                      fascinating that a drive of about 4 and a half hours can take us
               14




                                                                                           Reprint 2026-27


Chapter 1.indd 14                                                                                                                                08-04-2025 11:30:42
                       Fig. 1.25. (Left) A part of the Aravallis; just beyond this range, the Thar Desert begins.
                                            (Right) A part of the Aravallis seen from space.


                    from Mount Abu in the Aravallis to Jodhpur in the Thar Desert,
                    a drive into a completely different geography?

                     LET’S EXPLORE
                     Look at the political map in the textbook and identify the states
                     that the range spans. Did you see Delhi, Rajasthan, Haryana
                     and Gujarat?

                    The Aravallis play a vital role in shaping the geography and
                    climate of northwestern India. One of its most important
                    functions is acting as a natural barrier, preventing the Thar
                    Desert from expanding further eastward. You will read more
                    about this later.
                    The Aravallis, rich in minerals
                    like marble, granite, zinc, and                                                                   India and the World: Land and the People
                    copper, have supported mining and                                                                 1 –Geographical Diversity of India

                    construction activities for centuries.
                    In fact, evidence from its ancient
                    mines at Zawar has shown that over
                    eight centuries ago, Indians were
                    the first in the world to master the
                    delicate process of extraction of zinc.
                    Historic forts, such as Chittorgarh,               Fig. 1.26. Kumbhalgarh Fort surrounded
                    Kumbhalgarh, and Ranthambore, are                  by the Aravallis; this location in the hills
                                                                        proved to be an excellent deterrent to
                    located here.                                                     the enemy.
                                                                                                                          15




                                                               Reprint 2026-27


Chapter 1.indd 15                                                                                                                    08-04-2025 11:30:45
                                                                                      The Peninsular Plateau
                                                                                      LET’S REMEMBER
                                                                                      A plateau is a landform that rises up from the surrounding
                                                                                      land and has a more or less flat surface; some of its sides are
                                                                                      often steep slopes.

                                                                                      India has several plateaus; the most important one is the
                                                                                      triangular peninsular area in the middle and south of the
                                                                                      country.
                                                                       Peninsula:     It is also a very old land formation! Since this region is a peninsula,
                                                                      A peninsula
                                                                                      surrounded by water on all three sides by the Arabian Sea, the Bay
                                                                      is a piece of
                                                                       land that is   of Bengal, and the Indian Ocean, it is called a peninsular plateau.
                                                                      surrounded
                                                                      by water on     The plateau is bordered by two mountain ranges, the Western
                                                                      three sides.    Ghats and Eastern Ghats. The Western Ghats are taller and run
                                                                                      along the western coast like a wall, with many beautiful waterfalls
                                                                                      flowing down their steep sides during the monsoon season.

                                                                                      DON’T MISS OUT
                                                                                      The Western Ghats have been declared a UNESCO World
                                                                                      Heritage Site. They are home to many rivers and have a rich
                                                                                      biodiversity. The northern portion of the Western Ghats are
                                                                                      also known as the Sahyadri Hills.
               Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 1




                                                                                      The Eastern Ghats are lower and broken into smaller hills
                                                                                      along the eastern coast. Between these mountain ranges lies the
                                                                                      Deccan Plateau, a vast area of flat highlands.
                                                                                      Rivers like the Godavari, Krishna, and Kaveri flow across the
                                                                                      plateau from west to east. These rivers are important for farming
                                                                                      and provide water to millions of people.

                                                                                      LET’S EXPLORE
                                                                                      Look at the physical map of India given at the end of the
                                                                                      book. Notice the direction of the flow of the rivers.

               16




                                                                                                          Reprint 2026-27


Chapter 1.indd 16                                                                                                                                               08-04-2025 11:30:45
                      Fig. 1.27. Dense forests of Chhattisgarh, home to many tribal communities

                    This plateau is rich in minerals, forests, and fertile land,
                    making it vital for India’s economy. It tilts a little to the east, so
                    a few of the rivers in this region flow towards the Bay of Bengal.
                    East-flowing rivers like the Godavari, Krishna, and Mahanadi
                    originate here, providing water for farming, industries, and
                    hydroelectric power. There are west-flowing rivers (Narmada,
                    Tapti) too, which drain into the Arabian Sea.
                    Dense forests on the plateau are home to tribal communities,
                    including the Santhal, Gond, Baiga, Bhil, and Korku. These tribes
                    have distinct languages, traditions, and ways of life closely
                    connected to Nature.

                     LET’S EXPLORE
                     Tribal communities are largely spread over the states of                     India and the World: Land and the People

                     Jharkhand, West Bengal, Odisha, Assam, Madhya Pradesh,
                                                                                                  1 –Geographical Diversity of India


                     Chhattisgarh, Maharashtra, Telangana, and Gujarat. Examine
                     the physical and political maps at the end of this book to locate
                     the states and connect them to their location on the physical
                     map.

                    Plateaus are home to many beautiful waterfalls in India,
                    as rivers flow over their uneven and rocky surfaces. These
                    waterfalls not only attract tourists but also help in hydroelectric
                    power generation and provide water for irrigation.                                17




                                                             Reprint 2026-27


Chapter 1.indd 17                                                                                                08-04-2025 11:30:46
                                                                                  Fig. 1.28. Powerhouse Waterfalls at Periyakanal, near Munnar, Kerala




                                                                              Fig. 1.29. Lion-tailed macaque                    Fig. 1.30. King cobra of the
                                                                                   in the Western Ghats                                Western Ghats
               Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 1




                                                                         Fig. 1.31. This is an
                                                                        insectivorous plant,
                                                                        meaning it feeds on
                                                                        insects, found in the            Fig. 1.32. Coal mines in the plateau; an important
                                                                      Western Ghats. It catches         resource, especially in the production of electricity.
                                                                       small insects in sticky            Coal is a fossil fuel, the use of which contributes
                                                                      traps and digests them!                             to global warming.
               18




                                                                                                         Reprint 2026-27


Chapter 1.indd 18                                                                                                                                                08-04-2025 11:30:49
                         Fig. 1.33. Mumbai, on the west coast, is India’s financial centre



                    India’s Amazing Coastlines
                    India’s coastline is dotted with beautiful beaches, rocky cliffs,
                    and lush green forests. Some beaches have golden sand while
                    others have black rocks. Some islands have coral reefs while
                    others are covered in thick jungles. India’s coasts are full of
                    surprises! The Indian coastline is over 7500 km long.

                     LET’S EXPLORE
                     Æ    Look at the physical map of India in your school atlas
                          or wall map and find the names of five rivers that flow
                          into the Bay of Bengal. Find out India’s coastal states and
                          discuss the difference between the western and eastern
                          coastal plains.
                     Æ    Do you know what it is called when these rivers split into
                                                                                             India and the World: Land and the People
                          multiple streams near the coast? Discuss with your teacher
                          in class to find out!
                                                                                             1 –Geographical Diversity of India




                    The West Coast of India
                    The West Coast of India stretches from Gujarat to Kerala, passing
                    through Maharashtra, Goa, and Karnataka. Most rivers here
                    originate in the Western Ghats, flow swiftly, and form estuaries.
                    The coastline is shaped by alluvial deposits from short rivers
                    and features coves, creeks, and estuaries, with the Narmada and
                    Tapti estuaries being the largest.                                           19




                                                              Reprint 2026-27


Chapter 1.indd 19                                                                                           08-04-2025 11:30:50
                                                                                   Fig. 1.34. An aerial view of a part of the west coast. Note how close the
                                                                                               hills of the Western Ghats are to the Arabian Sea.


                                                                                 The west coast has many important ports and cities. These have
                                                                                 been the centres of economic activity for millennia.

                                                                                 The East Coast
                                                                                                                The East Coast lies between the Eastern
                                                                                                                Ghats and the Bay of Bengal, stretching
                                                                                                                from the Ganga delta to Kanyakumari.
                                                                                                                It has wide plains and major river
                                                                                                                deltas, including Mahanadi, Godavari,
                                                                                                                Krishna, and Kaveri. Important water
                                                                                                                bodies like Chilika Lake and Pulicat
                                                                                                                Lake (a lagoon, which is a body of water
                                                                                                                separated from larger bodies of water
               Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 1




                                                                                                                by a natural barrier) are found here.
                                                                                                               Deltas are landforms formed at the
                                                                                                               mouth of a river when it deposits
                                                                      Fig. 1.35. Satellite view of the East    sediments into a larger body of water,
                                                                                 Coast of India.               such as an ocean, a lake, or another
                                                                                    river. Over time, these sediments build up, forming a triangular
                                                                                    or fan-shaped area. The Godavari, Krishna, Kaveri and Mahanadi
                                                                                    rivers create fertile deltas, making the land ideal for farming.

                                                                                 Indian Islands
                                                                                 The Indian Islands refer to the group of islands scattered across
                                                                                 the Indian Ocean, the Arabian Sea, and the Bay of Bengal,
               20                                                                which form part of India’s territory. India has two major island




                                                                                                       Reprint 2026-27


Chapter 1.indd 20                                                                                                                                              08-04-2025 11:30:51
                    groups — Lakshadweep in the Arabian Sea and the Andaman
                    and Nicobar Islands in the Bay of Bengal. These islands have
                    unique wildlife, beautiful beaches, coral reefs, and volcanoes.
                    Several ancient tribes made these islands their home tens of
                    thousands of years ago.

                    Lakshadweep islands
                    Lakshadweep is an archipelago (a group of islands) located in
                    the Arabian Sea, close to the Malabar coast of Kerala. It is made
                    up of 36 islands made of coral. Not all islands are inhabited by
                    people. India controls a vast marine area, allowing for fishing,
                    resource exploration, and environmental protection.

                    Andaman and Nicobar islands
                    This archipelago comprises more than 500 large and small
                    volcanic islands, divided into two distinct groups — the Andaman
                    and the Nicobar Islands. Their location is very important.




                           Fig. 1.36. Coral reef in the                       Fig. 1.37. Coral reef in the   India and the World: Land and the People
                             Lakshadweep Islands                                   Andaman Islands           1 –Geographical Diversity of India




                               Fig. 1.38. A floating dock (a small port) of the Indian Navy near
                                                      the Andaman Islands.                                       21




                                                            Reprint 2026-27


Chapter 1.indd 21                                                                                                           08-04-2025 11:30:52
                                                                                                                     They are like the outposts of India,
                                                                                                                     keeping an eye on the ocean. It is home
                                                                                                                     to a variety of flora and fauna. The
                                                                                                                     Andaman Islands are also significant
                                                                                                                     from a historical point of view — many
                                                                                                                     of our freedom fighters were jailed
                                                                                                                     there under the most severe conditions
                                                                                                                     in a prison complex called ‘Cellular
                                                                                                                     Jail’. It has been preserved to remind
                                                                                                                     us of the tremendous sacrifices that
                                                                                                                     our forefathers made so we could be
                                                                       Fig. 1.39. An aerial view of the active       free. We will discuss this some more in
                                                                      volcano on Barren Island, the only one         higher classes.
                                                                                      in India


                                                                                      DON’T MISS OUT
                                                                                     Barren Island (Fig. 1.39 above) in the Andaman and Nicobar
                                                                                     Islands is the only active volcano in India. It sometimes erupts,
                                                                                     sending smoke and lava into the sky!

                                                                                     The Delta in West Bengal and the
                                                                                     Sundarbans
                                                                                                                      As we travel back from the islands
                                                                                                                      towards the eastern side of the
               Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 1




                                                                                                                      Himalayas via the Bay of Bengal,
                                                                                                                      we come to the Sundarbans.
                                                                                                                      This is located in the delta of the
                                                                                                                      Ganga, Brahmaputra (you saw
                                                                                                                      them earlier in the chapter) and
                                                                                                                      their tributaries. This delta has a
                                                                                                                      unique combination of the river,
                                                                            Fig. 1.40. Mangroves of the delta in the  sea and land. About half of it is
                                                                                  Sundarbans of West Bengal           located in India, and the rest is in
                                                                                       Bangladesh. This is also a UNESCO Heritage site. The Sundarbans
                                                                                       are home to many species, including the Royal Bengal Tiger.
                                                                                     Note: Do remember to look at the map and identify where the
               22                                                                    delta is.




                                                                                                            Reprint 2026-27


Chapter 1.indd 22                                                                                                                                              08-04-2025 11:30:52
                         Fig. 1.41. Left to right, top to bottom: Seven Sisters Waterfalls,
                      Meghalaya, India; The Shad Suk Mynsiem festival is celebrated by the
                     Khasi people as a form of gratitude towards nature; Living roots bridge   India and the World: Land and the People
                                 near Nongriat village, Cherrapunjee, Meghalaya                1 –Geographical Diversity of India



                    The hills of the Northeast
                    Stay on the map as we move towards the hills of the Northeast,
                    our final destination for now. Can you see Garo, Khasi, and
                    Jantia marked on the map? These hills, part of the Meghalaya
                    Plateau, are known for their lush greenery, heavy rainfall, and
                    breathtaking waterfalls. This region experiences one of the
                    highest rainfalls in the world, making it rich in forests, unique
                    wildlife, and fertile land.
                                                                                                   23




                                                             Reprint 2026-27


Chapter 1.indd 23                                                                                             08-04-2025 11:30:54
                                                                      DON’T MISS OUT
                                                                                                Mawlynnong Village, situated in
                                                                                                the East Khasi Hills of Meghalaya,
                                                                                                is renowned as the ‘cleanest village
                                                                                                in Asia’. This picturesque village
                                                                                                is famous for its well-maintained
                                                                                                cleanliness, bamboo dustbins, and
                                                                                                eco-friendly living practices. The
                                                                                                village is also known for its living
                                                                                                root bridges, which are created by
                                                                                                weaving tree roots over the course
                                                                                                of many years.
                                                                                                Fig. 1.42. Living root bridges showcase
                                                                                                the craftsmanship of the tribes of the
                                                                                                Northeast.



                                                                      Before we move on …
                                                                      Æ   India gives its name to the subcontinent it is a part of.
                                                                      Æ   It has many diverse geographical features, ranging from
                                                                          the snowy Himalayas to the heat of the Thar Desert. The
                                                                          plains are watered by a large number of rivers. There is also
                                                                          a peninsular plateau with the Arabian Sea on the west and
               Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 1




                                                                          the Bay of Bengal in the east.
                                                                      Æ   These diverse geographic features have created a variety
                                                                          of conditions with respect to soil, flora, fauna, life and
                                                                          economic opportunities, and honed a rich culture.
                                                                      Æ   These geographical features have played an important role
                                                                          in shaping our civilisation.


                                                                      Questions and activities

                                                                      1. What, in your opinion, are two important geographical
                                                                         features of India? Why do you think they are important?


               24




                                                                                        Reprint 2026-27


Chapter 1.indd 24                                                                                                                         08-04-2025 11:30:55
                    2. What do you think India might have looked like if the
                       Himalayas did not exist? Write a short note or sketch a
                       drawing to express your imagination.
                    3. India has been called a ‘mini-continent’. Based on what
                       you’ve read, why do you think this is so?
                    4. Follow one of India’s big rivers from where it starts to
                       where it meets the ocean. What are the different ways in
                       which people might utilise this river along its journey?
                       Discuss in groups in your class.
                    5. Why is the southern part of India referred to as a peninsular
                       plateau?
                    6. Which UNESCO Heritage Site mentioned in this chapter
                       did you find more interesting? Write a short paragraph to
                       describe what about it is interesting.
                    7. Look at the two maps of India, physical as well as political,
                       given at the end of this book. Identify the place you are
                       at now. Which physical feature of India would you use to
                       describe its location?
                    8. Food preservation techniques differ from place to place
                       across India. They are adapted to local conditions. Do a class
                       project. Gather different methods of preserving food. Hint:
                       Drying vegetables when they are in season for use during
                       the off-season.
                    9. Despite having such different regions (mountains, deserts,
                       plains, coasts), India remains one country. How do you think
                       our geography has helped unite people?                           India and the World: Land and the People
                                                                                        1 –Geographical Diversity of India




                                                                                            25




                                                        Reprint 2026-27


Chapter 1.indd 25                                                                                      08-04-2025 11:30:55
               Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 1




               26




                                                                      Reprint 2026-27


Chapter 1.indd 26                                                                       08-04-2025 11:30:55
