--- SOURCE PAGE 21 ---
Culture and Tradition




                                           Ila Sachani:
                         Embroidering Dreams with her Feet
            Let us do these activities before we read.
                  I Look at the given picture and information. Discuss the questions with
                    your teacher and classmates.



                                                           Pranav M. Balasubramaniam is
                                                           from Palakkad in Kerala. Though
                                                           he was born without both hands,
                                                           he has excelled as an artist, a
                                                           singer, and a para-sportsperson.



                    1. Do you think Pranav’s task is simple? Why or why not?
                    2. How does Pranav’s special ability make you feel?
                    3. What qualities do you think were important for Pranav to become
                       successful?
                    4. What message does Pranav’s story give us?
                  II Look at the picture of Kathiawar embroidery. Discuss in pairs.
                    1. List the steps you think are needed to
                       create this embroidery.
                    2. Discuss if these steps can be done
                       with feet, instead of hands.
                    3. What efforts would be needed if
                       someone has to embroider with their
                       feet? Do you think it is possible?

                                                                      Kathiawar embroidery




                                                                                             151

                                                Reprint 2026-27

Unit 5.indd 151                                                                              09-Dec-24 3:56:55 PM

--- SOURCE PAGE 22 ---
Poorvi—Grade 6




            	Let us read
             1. When you enter a tiny room in Moti Vavdi
                village, Bhavnagar, Gujarat, you will see
                lots of bright colours. There are many
                lovely things like cushions, bedcovers,
                pillows, and more, with beautiful designs.
                Ila Sachani, a wonderful lady with a big
                smile, makes all these using a shiny needle
                                                                   Ila Sachani
                to create these designs. She is very good at
                Kathiawar embroidery—a style that needs
                a lot of skill.
             2. Ila Sachani’s journey began in the quiet
                settings of Amreli, Gujarat, where she
                was born into a farmer’s family. From the
                beginning, life presented its challenges,      challenges:
                as Ila was born with her hands hanging         difficulties
                loose by her sides. Unlike other children,
                she could not use her hands in the usual
                way. While other small hands drew figures
                in the sand or plucked wild flowers, she
                wondered why she could not join them.
                She too wanted to hold a chalk in her hands
                and draw figures on a slate.
             3. Ila’s mother and grandmother
                encouraged the little girl and
                were single-minded to help her
                overcome her challenge. They
                were skilled in the traditional art
                of Kathiawar embroidery and
                decided to share this art with Ila.            single-minded:
                They taught her to create many                 focused



             152

                                        Reprint 2026-27

Unit 5.indd 152                                                                  09-Dec-24 3:56:56 PM

--- SOURCE PAGE 23 ---
Culture and Tradition




                  beautiful patterns using her feet! It was
                  certainly not an easy task, but Ila accepted
                  the challenge with determination. Her            determination:
                  parents also helped her learn to do things       will power
                  with her legs, like eating and combing her
                  hair.
             4. Threading a needle was hard, but Ila did
                not give up and became an expert at a
                young age. Her younger brother and sister
                helped her too. She learned many styles,
                even ones from outside Gujarat—Kachhi,
                Kashmiri, Lucknawi and others.
             5. For Ila, embroidery became a way to express
                herself. At first, she crafted fine designs
                only for her family and friends, who were          awestruck:
                awestruck by her talent. They talked about         amazed

                those designs to others. Soon, the people in
                the village, too, discovered Ila’s special skill
                and the admiration for her work began to
                spread.
             6. Word reached the government office in
                Surat. They were moved by Ila’s story and
                impressed by her work. They decided to
                display some samples of her embroidery
                at a state exhibition. This experience
                opened new doors for Ila. People observed
                the beauty woven by her feet and readily
                purchased the creations. Ila was no more a
                hidden talent, but famous!




                                                                                   153

                                          Reprint 2026-27

Unit 5.indd 153                                                                    09-Dec-24 3:56:56 PM

--- SOURCE PAGE 24 ---
Poorvi—Grade 6




             7. Encouraged by this popularity, Ila            popularity:
                participated in more exhibitions, not just    fame
                within the state but at the national level.
                She received many awards and honours,
                not just for her art but also the willpower
                and creativity that her work showed. Ila
                Sachani, once a farmer’s daughter facing a
                tough challenge, worked hard and became
                a celebrated artist and receiver of the
                President’s Medal.
             8. The most important change for Ila was
                the new independence. Through her skill,
                she not only earned a regular income but
                also found joy in doing what she loved.
                She proved, through her creations, that
                challenges can be turned into victories
                with focus, hard work, positivity and never
                giving up.
             9. Her embroidery, created with her feet,
                reminds us that art has the power to rise
                above physical boundaries and touch
                the soul.




                             Kachhi embroidery


             154

                                          Reprint 2026-27

Unit 5.indd 154                                                             09-Dec-24 3:56:57 PM

--- SOURCE PAGE 25 ---
Culture and Tradition




            Let us discuss
                  Read the paragraphs and write the main idea for each. Then, match the
                  main idea with two supporting details.


                   Paragraph        Main idea                    Two supporting details

                        1      Introduction to Ila        (i) Examples of embroidered things
                               Sachani’s colourful
                                                         (ii) Ila’s use of shiny needle
                               embroidery
                        2                                 (i)
                               Early challenges and
                               family support            (ii)

                        3                                 (i)

                                                         (ii)

                        4                                 (i)

                                                         (ii)

                        5                                 (i)

                                                         (ii)

                        6                                 (i)
                               Recognition at a state
                               exhibition                (ii)

                        7                                 (i)

                                                         (ii)

                       8–9                                (i) Financial independence and joy

                                                         (ii) Challenges can be turned into
                                                                victories




                                                                                             155

                                              Reprint 2026-27

Unit 5.indd 155                                                                              18-Mar-25 3:01:44 PM

--- SOURCE PAGE 26 ---
Poorvi—Grade 6




                       Let us think and reflect
                  I Read the following lines and answer the questions that follow.
            		 Unlike other children, she could not use her hands in the usual way. While
               other small hands drew figures in the sand or plucked wild flowers, she
               wondered why she could not join them. She too wanted to hold a chalk in
               her hands and draw figures on a slate.

                     1. Choose the correct option to fill in the blank.
            		 ‘Unlike other children’ means that Ila was _____________. (unaware/
               different/simple)
                     2. What could Ila have felt when she could not join others in things
                        they did?
                     3. Complete the following with a suitable reason.

            		 Ila could not draw figures on the slate because ___________.
                  II What creative ways did Ila and her family use to overcome the challenges
                     she faced?
             III How did ‘new independence’ help Ila?
             IV Why was the first state exhibition an important event in Ila’s life?
                  V What does the sentence, ‘art has the power to rise above physical
                    boundaries and touch the soul’, tell us about the power of art?
             VI How can we be helpful and encouraging like Ila’s family and friends
                when someone faces challenges?
            VII How can Ila’s story help others to overcome challenges in their lives?


            	Let us learn
                  I Read the words from the text given in Column A. Then, try to understand
                    what they mean by reading the sentences in Column B. Now, match the
                    word to its correct synonym in Column C. There are two extra synonyms
                    given. You may refer to the dictionary.



             156

                                                 Reprint 2026-27

Unit 5.indd 156                                                                         09-Dec-24 3:56:57 PM

--- SOURCE PAGE 27 ---
Culture and Tradition




                      Column A                   Column B                               Column C

                        Word                      Sentence                                  Synonym

                     tiny         The garden was tiny but the park was             silent
                                  really big.
                                                                                   work
                     wonderful    The wonderful artwork made everyone
                                  clap.
                                                                                   happy
                     quiet        The quiet library was a better place to
                                  study than the noisy classroom.                  small

                     task         Completing the Science homework
                                                                                   difficult
                                  was a challenging task as it had many
                                  questions.                                       fantastic
                     tough        We know that tough times can be
                                  overcome, if we try sincerely.                   dangerous

                  II Unscramble the antonyms of the words in Column A. An example has
                     been given for you.
            		 Example: display – E D I H                           (H I D E )
                    1. tiny – E G H U                               (H __ __ __)
                    2. wonderful – R E E B L I T R                  (T __ R __ __ B ___ E)
                    3. quiet – I Y N S O                            (N __ __ __ __)
                    4. task – S I A E M T P                         (P __ S T __ __ E)
                    5. tough – SEYA                                 (E __ __ __)
            		 Use these antonyms in sentences of your own.
             III Read the sentences from the text and focus on the highlighted words.
                     • You will see lots of bright colours.
                     • There are many lovely things like cushions and bedcovers.
                     • They taught her to create many beautiful patterns using her feet!
                     • She learned many styles.
                     • She received many awards.


                                                                                                      157

                                                  Reprint 2026-27

Unit 5.indd 157                                                                                       09-Dec-24 3:56:57 PM

--- SOURCE PAGE 28 ---
Poorvi—Grade 6




                   1. The highlighted words tell us about the quantity. Choose what the
                      words show.
                       (i) Unmentioned quantity
                      (ii) Large quantity
                   2. Let us now understand what words of quantity tell us.
            		 Fill in the blanks to complete an example for each word of quantity.
               Hints are given in the brackets.

                         (i)    We saw ______ buses on the road.            (countable noun)

                        (ii)    How ______ milk do you want?                (uncountable noun)

                        (iii)   There is ______ milk needed.                (uncountable noun)

                        (iv)    I need ______ examples.                     (countable noun)
                                I have ______ energy left.                  (countable and
                         (v)
                                She picked ______ flowers.                  uncountable nouns)
                        (vi)    I ate ______ rice.                          (uncountable noun)

                      Now, create two sentences for each word of quantity (i-vi), and
                      share them with your teacher and classmates.


            	Let us listen
            		 You will listen to a talk about Kathiawar embroidery. As you listen, circle
               the correct option. (refer to page 164 for transcript)
                  1. Form                                2. Colours
                     (i) old                                  (i) soft
                    (ii) new                                 (ii) bright
                  3. Stitches                            4. Seen on
                     (i) running stitch                       (i) children’s caps
                    (ii) chain stitch                        (ii) pants




             158

                                                     Reprint 2026-27

Unit 5.indd 158                                                                                  09-Dec-24 3:56:57 PM

--- SOURCE PAGE 29 ---
Culture and Tradition




                    5. Things used                    6. Designs
                        (i) small mirrors                 (i) elephants and horses
                       (ii) shapes of buttons            (ii) squares and triangles


                       Let us speak
            		 In pairs, write down two questions you would like to ask Ila Sachani.
                     1. Look at two examples.

            		
             Where were you born?                      Did you go to school?
            		The Yes/No questions use a rising tone at the end.
                     2. Speak the example questions aloud as a peer activity at least five
                        times.
                     3. Now, take turns to ask your questions to another classmate.
                        Speak clearly and with the correct rising tone as shown in 1.

                       Let us write
                      • Collect four/five items (such as flowers, leaves, pins, waste paper, old
                        cards, cardboard boxes, straws, twigs, etc.).
                      • Use these items to create any kind of artwork.
            		 Now, write a paragraph describing the artwork that you have created.
               Give a suitable title to your paragraph.



                       Let us explore
                  1. Does anyone in your family or neighbourhood do embroidery? Find out
                     what type of embroidery they do and how they learnt it.
                  2. Try a simple stitch on cloth with the guidance of a family member.
                  3. Visit the given link to find out about embroidery types from different
                     parts of India. Share with your teacher and classmates which one you
                     liked the most and why.
                    https://indianculture.gov.in/textiles-and-fabrics-of-india/type-of-
                    textile/embroidery


                                                                                              159

                                                  Reprint 2026-27

Unit 5.indd 159                                                                               18-Mar-25 3:03:31 PM

--- SOURCE PAGE 30 ---
Poorvi—Grade 6




                               National War Memorial
            National War Memorial, New Delhi ¼jk"Vªh; lej Lekjd] ubZ fnYyh½
            was established in February 2019. It is a national monument
            built by the Government of India in honour of our brave soldiers.


            	Let us read

            In Bharat’s heartland, a grand sight to behold,
            The National War Memorial, honours brave stories retold.
            With respect and grace, it stands with pride,
            Each name etched, each stone, each story to confide.
            From battle fields to skies, and to oceans wide,
            They stand for Bharat, side by side.
            The eternal flame, in silence it glows,
            Paying homage to their courage that shows.
            Their sacrifice, always in our mind,
            In blessed memory, forever remind.
            With pride and respect, let’s always remember,
            At the National War Memorial, their sacrifice forever.




                             National War Memorial                     Amar Jawan Jyoti



             160

                                                     Reprint 2026-27

Unit 5.indd 160                                                                           09-Dec-24 3:57:00 PM

--- SOURCE PAGE 31 ---
Culture and Tradition




            Let us do these activities.
              1. Read the poem aloud.
              2. Recite the poem with your classmates and teacher.
              3. Remember the poem.


            	Let us explore
              1. Visit the website of the National War Memorial and learn more about it.
            		
             https://www.mygov.in
              2. Plan a visit to the National War Memorial with your teacher/parents.




                                                                                      161

                                            Reprint 2026-27

Unit 5.indd 161                                                                       09-Dec-24 3:57:00 PM