Let us discuss
 1. What was Jahnavi’s dream? Was it 
important to her? Why?
 2. Do you think the river can help 
her in fulfilling her dream? How?
Learning TogeTher
Unit 1.indd   3Unit 1.indd   3 06-Mar-25   2:47:10 PM06-Mar-25   2:47:10 PM
Reprint 2026-27


--- SOURCE PAGE 4 ---
Poorvi
II
“Even little Ramu goes to school,” said Jahnavi, “pity, the school 
isn’t by the sea,” said the River. “Then I could take you along, 
you know. But, I suppose I couldn’t really. You’d get your feet 
wet. And that would never do! I’m afraid there’s only one thing 
you can do.”
“Can I do something?” asked Jahnavi. “Well, it’s up to you,” 
said the River. “Seems to me little girls can do as much as little 
boys—they swim as fast as little boys. You just slip along one 
morning and sit there in the school and listen to what’s going 
on, and maybe the teacher will let you stay.”
“I couldn’t,” gasped Jahnavi. “I couldn’t! They’d scare me! 
They’d chase me out.”
The River laughed. “You? Scared?” the River said, “when you’re 
not afraid of the green lizard, or of the snake in the bamboo 
clump, (Jahnavi startled) or the big trains rattling past that 
bridge.” “Trains are noisy; I prefer ships,” said the River.
Jahnavi never knew the snake lived in the bamboo clump.
“What are ships?” she asked.
“Big boats,” said the River, “so big that they can take hundreds 
of people, and they sail along the sea with lights that shine all 
night.”
Jahnavi held her breath. “Will they come here?” she asked. 
“I’m afraid not,” said the River. “Too large, you know. Chandu’s 
catamaran is good enough for me. Chandu can take you to see 
a ship, someday.”
“They’d never let me!” wailed Jahnavi. 
“Try going to school first,” said the River. “Remember—it’s up 
to you!”
wailed: (here) 
complained in a 
loud voice
catamaran: a 
kind of boat
clump: 
a small group of 
trees growing 
together
rattling: noise 
made by shaking 
things
4
Unit 1.indd   4Unit 1.indd   4 06-Mar-25   2:47:10 PM06-Mar-25   2:47:10 PM
Reprint 2026-27


--- SOURCE PAGE 5 ---
Learning TogeTher
5
Jahnavi gathered courage. The next day she reached the school, 
panting and out of breath and stood by the door listening while 
the teacher read out the lesson. It was a story about a prince 
called Asˊ hoka, who became a great king. Little Appu had fallen 
asleep on her shoulder. She crept nearer and nearer till she was 
in the back row, squatting with the others on the earthen floor. 
Little Appu made no noise and she listened.
“Where did you spring from, little girl?” asked the teacher. “And 
what is your name? You’re new in my class.” 
“She’s Gopi’s sister, Gopi is in the next class,” said one of the boys. 
“It’s Jahnavi,” said another. “So, you’re Gopi’s little sister? Nice 
lad, Gopi.”
“If you really, really want to come to my school, Jahnavi,” the 
teacher had said, “we’ll talk to your father about it. Don’t you 
worry. We’ll find a way.”
Jahnavi saw the teacher walking up the steps to their gate the 
next evening when she was lighting the lamp. She could see her 
father scratching his cheek the way he did when he was worried 
and the teacher was nodding and saying something she couldn’t 
make out. And Mother said, “Little Jahnavi, I shall miss you when 
you go to school. Girls should learn as much as they want. When I 
was your age, I wanted to go to school, but your grandmother said 
‘No’, but now, I am glad the teacher came to talk to your father.” 
Unit 1.indd   5Unit 1.indd   5 06-Mar-25   2:47:12 PM06-Mar-25   2:47:12 PM
Reprint 2026-27


--- SOURCE PAGE 6 ---
Poorvi

Let us discuss
Complete the table given below with Jahnavi’s questions in Column 1 and 
the River’s answers in Column 2. Check your answers with the teacher. 
Column 1 Column 2
...why the moon always comes 
from behind the hills…?
… little girls can do as much as 
little boys.
Big boats, so big that they can take 
hundreds of people, and they sail 
along the sea with lights that shine 
all night.
Will they come here?
6
And Jahnavi said, “Mother, when I grow up, I’ll be 
a teacher and I’ll go from house to house in our 
village and ask all the little girls to come to my 
school. And I’ll teach them all that I’m going to 
learn.”
And she went down the path between the fields 
the next morning before school began, to meet 
the River. “I did it!” she told the River. “I was 
scared, but I did it! And they’re letting me go. I’m 
going to learn to write my name and do sums and 
find out why our little fishes in the rice fields turn 
into frogs.” She heard the river’s sleepy chuckle, 
“Come again, little girl, and I’ll tell you all about 
the ships that sail the sea.”
KamaLa nair 
(An extract adapted from The Day the River Spoke)
Unit 1.indd   6Unit 1.indd   6 06-Mar-25   2:47:13 PM06-Mar-25   2:47:13 PM
Reprint 2026-27


--- SOURCE PAGE 7 ---
Learning TogeTher
7
	 Let 	us	think	and	reflect
 I Read the extracts given below and answer the questions that follow.
 1. “You shouldn’t cry, you know,” the voice went on. “And you really 
shouldn’t be scared, when you have been coming here to see me every 
day, well, almost every day.” She was puzzled. It was such a voice, 
like the river. It couldn’t be the river! “Well, tell me all about it,” said 
the River, for it was the River. “I’ve got to hurry to reach the sea, you 
know.”
 (i) Complete the sentence with the correct option from those given 
in the brackets. 
  The tone of the River in the given extract is __________________. 
(assuring/sympathising)
 (ii) Select a phrase from the extract which shows that Jahnavi was 
a frequent visitor to the spot.
 (iii) Choose the correct option to complete the sentence.
  The use of an exclamation mark at the end of the line, ‘It 
couldn’t be the river!’  expresses __________________.
 A. excitement B. hesitation C. irritation D. disbelief
 (iv) Choose three qualities of the River highlighted in the extract 
from the words in the box given below.
affectionate forgiving thoughtful impatient kind-hearted 
 2. “Can I do something?” asked Jahnavi. “Well, it’s up to you,” said the 
River. “Seems to me little girls can do as much as little boys—they swim 
as fast as little boys. You just slip along one morning and sit there in 
the school and listen to what’s going on, and maybe the teacher will let 
you stay.”
  “I couldn’t,” gasped Jahnavi. “I couldn’t! They’d scare me! They’d chase 
me out.”
 (i) Complete the sentence with an appropriate reason. 
  According to the River, there was no difference between girls 
and boys because __________________. 
 (ii) Identify whether the following statement is true or false.
  The River encourages Jahnavi to have faith in herself and fulfill 
her desire to go to school. 
Unit 1.indd   7Unit 1.indd   7 06-Mar-25   2:47:13 PM06-Mar-25   2:47:13 PM
Reprint 2026-27


--- SOURCE PAGE 8 ---
 (iii) Choose the correct option to complete the sentence.
  When the River suggests that Jahnavi should ‘slip along’, it 
means that she should move __________________.
 A. quickly B. casually C. quietly D. confidently
 (iv) What does the repetition of the phrase I couldn’t, tell us?
 II Answer the following questions. 
 1. Why does the writer describe different aspects of nature in great 
detail at the beginning of the story? Why do you think the writer 
does this?
 2. How did the River know so much about Jahnavi?
 3. Jahnavi says, “And I’m so old now, they’ll never let me go.” What can 
you infer about Jahnavi and the school from this line?
 4. Why did the River laugh when Jahnavi said she would be scared at 
school?
 5. Why should Jahnavi follow the River’s advice?
 6. How does the conversation between Jahnavi and the River make the 
story more appealing? 
 7. What is the main message that the writer intends to convey?