Let us discuss
 I Complete the cause-and-effect table given below.
Causes Effects
1. Anand set up his burglar alarm 
and rigged it to work when the 
door was opened softly.
frantic: 
hurried and 
disorganised
crestfallen 
look: sad and 
disappointed 
appearance
offended: felt 
upset or hurt
Unit 3.indd   94Unit 3.indd   94 06-Mar-25   2:48:50 PM06-Mar-25   2:48:50 PM
Reprint 2026-27


--- SOURCE PAGE 5 ---
Dreams anD Discoveries
95
2. Anita was able to avoid any 
responsibility as Anand faced 
the consequences alone.
3. We watched the movie ‘Back to 
the Future’.
Anand:
4. Papa firmly said ‘ NO’ to trying 
out the time machine.
 II Do you think Anand was able to keep his promise regarding the time 
machine? If yes, why? If no, why not?
II
They left by the afternoon train and were coming back the 
following evening. Anand fell asleep immediately, but I stayed 
up to finish a novel. At about eleven thirty I thought I heard 
a scratching at the front door. Telling myself it was only my 
imagination, I went back to the book. A little later there was 
a rattle and a click. I was really scared, I can tell you, what 
with a murder story before me and then strange noises in the 
middle of the night! I shook Anand and whispered, “Listen, 
there’s someone at the door.”
“Go and open it then,” he muttered groggily.
“You silly! Someone’s trying to get in,” I said.
Anand sat up. “Who? What?”
“I don’t know,” I said. “What shall we do?”
“Let’s holler for help,” he said. Before we could do anything, 
the door swung open and we found ourselves looking 
at a ruffianly fellow with a green scarf around his neck.  
Anand gasped.
“Hey, it’s Boppa!” I whispered. It was indeed the fellow who 
had recently begun sweeping out the compounds in our row of 
houses. So, he was the thief, and no wonder. He knew exactly 
when the occupants were out, leaving the coast clear.
The fellow gave an evil grin. “One squeak out of you and see 
what happens,” he said, brandishing  his cudgel and backing 
out of the room. We heard him slide the latch in. 
“What do we do now?” I asked in a low voice. 
groggily: 
sleepily
ruffianly: 
rough or violent 
looking
gasped: took 
a short, deep 
breath in 
surprise
brandishing: 
waving
cudgel: a short, 
thick stick used 
as a weapon
Unit 3.indd   95Unit 3.indd   95 06-Mar-25   2:48:50 PM06-Mar-25   2:48:50 PM
Reprint 2026-27


--- SOURCE PAGE 6 ---
96
muffled: not a 
very clear and 
loud sound
clattering: 
continuous loud 
noises
eerie: strange
“Let’s shout anyway,” Anand suggested.
The door opened suddenly again in the middle of our 
discussion.
“No noise from you! Now, where is your father’s room?”
I was about to direct him upstairs when Anand said quickly, 
“The one next to this one.”
“You silly goose!” I said angrily as soon as the man had gone.
“That’s your room. He’ll come back as mad as mad can be.” 
“At least it will give us some time to think of something,” Anand 
said. “He’ll take a while to locate the light switch. Let’s shout.” 
All of a sudden there was a crash followed by a loud scream. 
More strange noises emerged from the next room—a few 
muffled thumps, an eerie whine, and a low, humming sound. 
“My time machine, he’s started it!” Anand gasped. “I wish we 
could get out of this room and see what is happening out there.”
There was another howl, much fainter this time, and a great 
deal of clattering. We shouted for all we were worth. In a few 
minutes, we heard footsteps running up our drive. Thankfully 
we recognised Mrs. Sharma’s voice, along with her husband 
and Dr. Mohan—also a neighbour.
“Anand! Anita! Children, what’s the matter? Where are you?”
Poorvi
Unit 3.indd   96Unit 3.indd   96 06-Mar-25   2:48:51 PM06-Mar-25   2:48:51 PM
Reprint 2026-27


--- SOURCE PAGE 7 ---
Dreams anD Discoveries
97
peering: looking 
carefully
unison: 
together
hastily: quickly
“Here!” we shouted in unison. In a minute the door was 
unlocked. 
“What on earth has been happening here, children?” Sharma 
Uncle asked. Both Anand and I fell over ourselves trying to 
explain. “Where is the fellow now?”
“The last we heard, he was in the time machine,” I explained 
hastily, seeing everyone looking rather puzzled.
We entered the room cautiously and turned on the lights. The 
time machine was still humming softly but otherwise there 
was no other sound from the room. 
“Well, where is he?” Dr. Mohan asked, peering behind the 
door. “Did you imagine this?”
“Oh no,” I protested. “How could both of us have imagined the 
same thing?”
“Maybe he ran out,” Anand suggested.
“I’m sure we’d have seen him. There’s only one way out of this 
house and we came the same way as soon as we heard you,” 
Sharma Uncle sounded very sure.
“Look!” Anand said, pointing to the floor. “He was wearing 
that.” Near the panel of switches was the green scarf.
Unit 3.indd   97Unit 3.indd   97 06-Mar-25   2:48:53 PM06-Mar-25   2:48:53 PM
Reprint 2026-27


--- SOURCE PAGE 8 ---
Poorvi
98
“Let’s search the house—perhaps he’s still around,” Dr. Mohan 
said, going upstairs.
Boppa was nowhere to be seen. “Well maybe he did run out 
and we missed him,” Mrs. Sharma said at last, “I can’t imagine 
what else could have happened.”
“My time machine! He’s gone through that!” Anand burst out, 
his eyes shining.
“What an imagination this boy has!” Mr. Sharma said, smiling 
indulgently. “Now off to bed, both of you. I’ll spend the night 
here so you needn’t worry about any more intruders now.”
indulgently: 
fondly
intruders: 
people who 
enter a place 
without 
permission
dismantled: 
taken apart
Needless to say, Boppa was never 
seen again. Anand insists that his time 
machine worked and he disappeared 
into the past. The machine itself was 
dismantled because Papa thought it 
wasn’t safe (maybe he also had a niggling 
suspicion that it worked), so we couldn’t 
try it out. 
As for Anand, he is convinced that he 
is a genius and has launched a new 
project—something about a telephone 
to contact creatures in outer space. Tell 
you all about it next time. 
anita rau BaDami
niggling: slight 
feeling (of)

Let us discuss
Arrange the following events in the correct order of occurrence. 
 1. The door swings open, and they see Boppa, standing there with an 
evil grin.
 2. Boppa is nowhere to be found, but his green scarf is lying near the 
time machine.
 3. Mrs. Sharma, her husband, and Dr. Mohan unlock the door and enter 
the house to help the children.
 4. Anita wakes Anand up, informing him that someone is trying to get 
into the house.
 5. Anand misleads Boppa into entering his room instead of his  
father’s room.
Unit 3.indd   98Unit 3.indd   98 06-Mar-25   2:48:54 PM06-Mar-25   2:48:54 PM
Reprint 2026-27


--- SOURCE PAGE 9 ---
Dreams anD Discoveries
99

Let us think and reflect
 I Read the extracts given below and answer the questions that follow.
 1. Before beginning this story, let me put you in the picture. I am 
Anita, fourteen years old. My brother Anand, one year younger 
than me, caused all that hoo-ha with his burglar alarm. The 
trouble with him is that he thinks he is a scientist. He loves 
tinkering with all sorts of electrical gadgets, tools, dynamos, 
planks of wood, and things like that. And he keeps creating 
‘inventions’ that never work out as they are supposed to. 
 (i) Complete the following sentence suitably b y choosing the 
correct option from those given in the brackets. 
  When Anita says, “…let me put you in the picture”, she 
wants to _________ (introduce/summarise) the situation for 
the benefit of the readers. 
 (ii) Anand loves ‘tinkering’ with all sorts of electrical gadgets. This 
means that he enjoys _________ gadgets.
 A. dismantling and creating B. labelling or naming 
 C. repairing or improving D. collecting and displaying 
 (iii) Which of the following options most suitably describes Anand’s 
personality?
 A. methodical and cautious B. creative and experimental
 C. energetic and hasty D. shy and reserved
 (iv) Based on the extr act, compare what Anita thinks of her brother 
Anand with what he thinks of himself.
 2. I was about to direct him upstairs, when Anand said quickly, 
“The one next to this one.”  
  “You silly goose!” I said angrily as soon as the man had gone.  
  “That’s your room. He’ll come back as mad as mad can be.”  
  “At least it will give us some time to think of something,” Anand 
said. “He’ll take a while to locate the light switch. Let’s shout.”  
All of a sudden there was a crash followed by a loud scream. 
More strange noises emerged from the next room—a few 
muffled thumps, an eerie whine, and a low, humming sound.
 (i) Complete the sentence given below with a suitable reason.
  Anita was angry with Anand because ____________.
 (ii) Which action of Anand shows his presence of mind?
Unit 3.indd   99Unit 3.indd   99 06-Mar-25   2:48:55 PM06-Mar-25   2:48:55 PM
Reprint 2026-27


--- SOURCE PAGE 10 ---
Poorvi
100
creative curious careful responsible bothersome confident
Character Traits Evidence from the Text
Anand
1. bothersome And this is not the first time he’s got on 
Papa’s nerves or frightened someone half 
to death in the house.
2. ____________ He loves tinkering with all sorts of 
electrical gadgets, tools, dynamos, planks 
of wood, and things like that.  And he keeps 
creating ‘inventions’ that never work out 
as they are supposed to.
3. ____________ “Nothing will go wrong this time. I’ve 
planned it out carefully. See the blueprint.”
Anita
1. ___________ “We’re old enough to look after ourselves, 
Ma…”
2.  ___________ “But how does the alarm know that a 
burglar is opening the door?”
3.  ___________ “Now clean up this mess before anyone 
gets home.”
 (iii) What might be the cause of the strange noises emerging from 
the next room?
 A. The intruder moving furniture around 
 B. Anand’s time machine getting activated
 C. The intruder locating the light switch 
 D. Anand’s invention malfunctioning
 (iv) Which of the following best describes the atmosphere in this 
extract?
 A. relaxing B. peaceful C. tense D. sad
 E. suspenseful F. joyful
 (a) A, D and E (b) B and F (c) C and E (d) Only D
 II Complete the table with the suitable traits of the characters based 
on  evidence from the text. Choose the traits given in the box below.  
An example has been done for you.
Unit 3.indd   100Unit 3.indd   100 06-Mar-25   2:48:55 PM06-Mar-25   2:48:55 PM
Reprint 2026-27


--- SOURCE PAGE 11 ---
Onomatopoeia is the use 
of words that imitate actual 
sounds of the thing they 
describe. The ‘boom’ of a 
firework exploding, the 
‘ding-dong’ of a bell, the 
‘pitter-patter’ of rain drops, 
the ‘tick-tock’ of a clock are all 
examples of onomatopoeia.
 1. Read the sound words used in the story in Column 1. Complete 
Column 2 by matching expressions from the box given below. An 
example has been done for you.
 whispered angrily
 constant and loud construction noises
 sudden loud sound of breaking
 a continuous low and soothing sound
Column 1 Column 2
(i) Crash sudden loud sound of breaking
(ii) Humming
(iii) Hissed
(iv) Hammering, sawing, 
clattering