Let us do these activities before we read.
 I Work in pairs. Recall a visit to a place that you liked. Discuss the details 
of that place and write about the following:
 1. Name of the place
 2. The person(s) you went with
 3. The things that you could: 
 • see • listen • smell • taste • touch and feel
 II How does this memory make you feel? 
 III Do you think your visit/experience would be different if you could not 
see or hear? Share your answers with your classmates and the teacher.
  Did you know that our five senses are essential for us to experience and 
make sense of the world around us?
Poorvi
Unit 1.indd   28Unit 1.indd   28 06-Mar-25   2:47:30 PM06-Mar-25   2:47:30 PM
Reprint 2026-27


--- SOURCE PAGE 29 ---
Learning TogeTher
symmetry: 
evenness
birch: a slender 
tree with thin 
peeling bark
quiver: shiver
shaggy: hairy

Let us discuss
 I Work in pairs. Identify the statements that are true from the ones 
given below. Share your answers with the teacher.
 1. The author expresses a deep longing to experience the world 
through the sense of hearing.        
 2. The author would like exploring the city only to observe how 
people are suffering.
 3. The author would spend the first day seeing the people whose 
kind-heartedness and friendship have enriched her life. 
 4. The author acknowledges that even in three days, she would not 
be able to see everything. 
 5. The author feels that everyone can find the greatest joy merely by 
the sense of touch.
 6. The author advises those who can see to appreciate every moment 
as if they might lose their senses tomorrow. 
 7. On the third day , the author would like to observe people in their 
daily lives and understand their experiences. 
strains: tunes
tactile sense: 
sense of touch
morsel: a small 
piece of food
facets: aspects
Unit 1.indd   31Unit 1.indd   31 06-Mar-25   2:47:31 PM06-Mar-25   2:47:31 PM
Reprint 2026-27


--- SOURCE PAGE 32 ---
Poorvi
32
 II Complete the table given below with what Helen Keller wanted to do on 
the three days if she had sight.
Day 1 Day 2 Day 3
see the people, know 
her friends from the 
feel of their faces, …
arise with the dawn, 
… 
 III The author says that you need eyes to be able to ‘see’ the true self of 
a person. Therefore, she refers to the eye as ‘window of the soul’.  
How is the narrator able to understand the feelings of a person? 
	 Let 	us	think	and	reflect
 I Read the extracts given below and answer the questions that follow.
 1. I feel the delicate symmetry of a leaf. I pass my hands lovingly about 
the smooth skin of a silver birch, or the rough, shaggy bark of a pine. 
In spring, I touch the branches of trees hopefully in search of a bud, the 
first sign of awakening Nature after her winter’s sleep. Occasionally, I 
am very fortunate; I place my hand gently on a small tree and feel the 
happy quiver of a bird in full song.
 (i) What does the ‘delicate symmetry of a leaf’ symbolise?
 (ii) List two phrases from the extract that describe the texture of 
objects in nature.
 (iii) Complete the sentence appropriately.
  The phrase ‘awakening Nature after her winter’ s sleep’ refers 
to __________________.
 (iv) What is the tone of the writer in this extract?
 A. nostalgic B. proud
 C. admiring D. celebratory 
 2. The next day I should arise with the dawn and see the thrilling miracle 
by which night is transformed into day. I should behold with awe 
the magnificent panorama of light with which the sun awakens the 
sleeping earth. This day I should devote to a hasty glimpse of the world, 
past and present. I should want to see the pageant of man’s progress, 
and so I should go to the museums.
Unit 1.indd   32Unit 1.indd   32 06-Mar-25   2:47:31 PM06-Mar-25   2:47:31 PM
Reprint 2026-27


--- SOURCE PAGE 33 ---
Learning TogeTher
 (i) The word ‘thrilling’ has been used with ‘miracle’. 
  Which of the following words does not match with the word 
‘thrilling’? 
 A. experience B. tale C. knowledge D. adventure
 (ii) Why does the writer refer to the earth as ‘sleeping earth’?
 (iii) Complete the sentence with an appropriate reason.
   The writer wishes to dedicate the day to a brief look at the 
present and past world because __________________.
 (iv) Why does the writer use ‘should’ multiple times in the extract?
 II Answer the following questions.
 1. The sense of touch makes up for the loss of sight and hearing. Explain 
this statement with reference to the text.
 2. Why does the author believe that the sense of sight is the most 
wonderful?
 3. How might the author’s opinion on making the most of our senses 
guide us to be kinder towards people with special abilities?
 4. What is the significance of imagining the loss of a sense, according to 
the author?
 5. How does the author encour age people to approach their everyday 
sensory experiences? 
 6. What do the author’s choices for the three days tell us about her 
values and priorities?
33
Unit 1.indd   33Unit 1.indd   33 06-Mar-25   2:47:32 PM06-Mar-25   2:47:32 PM
Reprint 2026-27


--- SOURCE PAGE 34 ---
 III Identify the modal verbs in the following sentences. Choose the functions 
they express from those given in the box below.
possibility necessity polite request ability moral obligation
 1. You can learn a lot from this experience. 
 2. They might arrive late due to traffic. 
Modal verbs are auxiliary verbs that express necessity, possibility, 
permission, or ability. They are used before the main verb to give 
additional information about the function of the main verb. Common 
modal verbs include can, could, may, might, shall, should, will, would, 
must, and ought to.