--- SOURCE PAGE 28 ---
Conquering The SummiT
Let us do these activities before we read.
 I Identify the activities represented by the icons given below. Share your 
answers with your classmates and the teacher.
 II Work in pairs and discuss the following questions.
 1. Why do you think people undertake the activities identified above? 
 2. How would they prepare for these activities? 
 3. Which one of them do you find the most exciting? Why? 
  Share your answers with the teacher.
 III Work in pairs to complete the word web given below. Share the answers 
with the teacher.
Qualities 
of a  
mountaineer
166
Unit 4.indd   166Unit 4.indd   166 07-Mar-25   1:52:28 PM07-Mar-25   1:52:28 PM
Reprint 2026-27


--- SOURCE PAGE 29 ---
Travel and advenTure
167
  Let us read
This is a story that narrates the triumph of will, 
courage, determination, and dedication. Arunima 
Sinha’s journey from a devastating accident to 
scaling the highest peak in the world stands as a 
beacon of hope and resilience. In 2011, at the age 
of 24, Arunima Sinha, a national-level volleyball 
player, faced a life-altering event. It challenged 
her in ways she could never have imagined. As 
she lay in the hospital bed with one leg amputated, 
Arunima made a vow that many would deem 
impossible: not only to walk again with a 
prosthetic leg but to scale Mount Everest. In 2013, 
she did just that, becoming the first Indian female 
amputee to achieve this feat. Hence, in 2015, she 
was awarded the Padma Shri, the fourth highest 
civilian award in India. She was also awarded the 
Tenzing Norgay National Adventure Award and 
Courtesy: Hindustan Times
beacon: 
source of 
inspiration
resilience: 
ability to 
recover quickly 
from a difficulty
amputated: cut 
off a part of the 
body (here the 
leg)
prosthetic leg: 
an artificial 
leg that helps 
people to move 
around easily
feat: 
achievement
harrowing: 
extremely 
disturbing and 
painful
rigorous: 
severe
National Award for Best Female Mountaineer.
Arunima hails from Ambedkar Nagar, a small district in Uttar 
Pradesh. Her father was an army engineer, and her mother 
worked as a health supervisor. Sports were a significant part 
of Arunima’s life, with her family having a natural inclination 
towards athletics. After completing her law degree following 
her post-graduation, Arunima decided to pursue a job in the 
paramilitary forces, which would allow her to continue her 
passion for sports while having a regular income.
On the fateful night of 11 April 2011, she met with a train 
accident. The hours that followed were harrowing. She never 
imagined she would survive that night, but survive she did, 
miraculously, displaying an extraordinary will to live. Arunima 
received a prosthetic leg and underwent physiotherapy. It was 
during this period that she made a profound decision. Inspired 
by an article about Mount Everest, she resolved to conquer 
the highest peak in the world. 
To pursue her ambition, Arunima Sinha completed a 
basic mountaineering course at the Nehru Institute of 
Mountaineering in Uttarkashi, followed by eighteen months 
of rigorous training. Arunima approached Bachendri Pal, the 
Unit 4.indd   167Unit 4.indd   167 07-Mar-25   1:52:29 PM07-Mar-25   1:52:29 PM
Reprint 2026-27


--- SOURCE PAGE 30 ---
Poorvi
first Indian woman to summit Everest, to guide her in the 
endeavour. Bachendri Pal instilled confidence in Arunima 
and said, “My child, you decided to climb Mount Everest in 
these situations with a prosthetic leg—you have conquered 
the Everest within you; the world will realise it later.”
On 21 May 2013, after 52 exhausting days, Arunima Sinha 
reached the summit of Mount Everest. Standing at the top 
of the world, she felt a surge of emotions—pride, relief, and 
an overwhelming sense of achievement. She displayed the 
Indian flag at the summit and left behind a photograph of her 
idol, Swami Vivekananda, whose teachings had inspired her 
throughout her journey.
Arunima’s feat did not end with Everest. By July 2016, she 
had summited seven peaks in Europe, Africa, Australia, 
South America, North America, and 
of course, Mount Everest in Asia. 
In January 2019, she climbed the 
seventh peak on Antarctica and 
became world’s first female amputee 
to climb Mount Vinson. Her goal to 
complete the Seven Summits was 
achieved.
Throughout her journey, Arunima 
has faced numerous challenges and 
setbacks. Yet, her story is not just about 
physical endurance but 
also about mental 
endeavour: an 
attempt to do 
something
surge: a sudden 
and great 
increase
endurance: 
(here) ability to 
continue doing 
something 
difficult for a 
long time
Unit 4.indd   168Unit 4.indd   168 07-Mar-25   1:52:29 PM07-Mar-25   1:52:29 PM
Reprint 2026-27


--- SOURCE PAGE 31 ---
Travel and advenTure
169
adversity: 
a difficult 
situation
testament: 
proof
conferred: 
given an official 
title or honour
fortitude: 
courage over a 
long period
fortitude and the power of a positive mind set. Her message is 
simple yet profound: “Never give up and work hard. Always 
remember your goal and work on it.”
Arunima’s autobiography, Born Again on the Mountain: A Story 
of Losing Everything and Finding It Back records her incredible 
journey to the top of the world. It is a story of triumph over 
adversity, a testament to the human spirit’s capacity to rise 
above the most challenging circumstances. 
She was conferred  with the honorary doctorate by the 
University of Strathclyde, Glasgow, UK. In her words, “Failure 
is not when we fall short of achieving our goals. It is when 
we don’t have goals worthy enough. Never forget your goal, 
respect it, work hard, and you will be the winner.” Dr. Arunima 
Sinha has not only conquered mountains but has also won 
people’s hearts the world over, inspiring them to reach their 
own summits.
Let us discuss
 I Read the statements given below and explain each statement in your 
words.
 1. Arunima Sinha is considered a beacon of hope and resilience.
 2. Arunima decided to climb Mount Everest despite losing her leg.
 3.  Bachendri Pal’s guidance was crucial in Arunima’s journey to the 
summit of Mount Everest.
 4. Arunima’s achievements go beyond just physical endurance.
 5. Arunima’s autobiography inspires readers around the world.
Vinson
Antarctica
Elbrus
Europe Denali
North America Everest
Asia
Aconcagua
South America
Kilimanjaro
Africa
Kosciuszko
Australia
Unit 4.indd   169Unit 4.indd   169 07-Mar-25   1:52:30 PM07-Mar-25   1:52:30 PM
Reprint 2026-27


--- SOURCE PAGE 32 ---
	 Let 	us	think	and	reflect
 I Read the extract given below and answer the questions that follow.
  Bachendri Pal instilled confidence in Arunima and said, “My child, you 
decided to climb Mount Everest in these situations with a prosthetic leg— 
you have conquered the Everest within you; the world will realise it later.”
  On 21 May 2013, after 52 exhausting days, Arunima Sinha reached the 
summit of Mount Everest. Standing at the top of the world, she felt a surge 
of emotions—pride, relief, and an overwhelming sense of achievement.
 1. Complete the sentence with a suitable reason.
  Bachendri Pal said that Arunima had conquered the Everest within 
her because ___________________.
 2. How might Arunima have felt after what Bachendri Pal told her?
 3. Choose a phrase from the extract which shows that reaching the 
summit of Mount Everest was tiring. 
 4. Select the correct option to complete the sentence.
  After her success when Arunima felt ‘an overwhelming sense of 
achievement’, she would have most likely said, “___________________.”
 (i) I am confident of my abilities
 (ii) I will accomplish this soon
 (iii) I am excited to begin this climb
 (iv) I finally realised my dream
 II Answer the following questions.
170
PooRvi
 1. What did Arunima do in order to fulfill her ambition 
of conquering Mount Everest?
 2. Arunima is a beacon of hope and resilience. Support 
this statement with evidence from the text.
 3. Arunima’s autobiography is titled Born Again on the 
Mountain: A Story of Losing Everything and Finding It 
Back. Why do you think this title is appropriate?
 4. Arunima says, “Failure is when we don’t have goals 
worthy enough.” What would be the most likely 
impact of this statement on readers?
Unit 4.indd   170Unit 4.indd   170 07-Mar-25   1:52:32 PM07-Mar-25   1:52:32 PM
Reprint 2026-27


--- SOURCE PAGE 33 ---
 Let us learn
 I Read the underlined phrases in sentences (i)–(v) and match them with 
their appropriate meanings given in the box below.
 1. genuine, sincere efforts 2. strength of mind  
 3. periods of time filled with tiring and demanding activities 
 4. an incident or experience that significantly changes a person’s life
 5. a source of inspiration or encouragement
 (i) Nisha was relieved when the final match was over after several 
exhausting days of practice.
 (ii) Despite several failures, her heartfelt attempts to learn the guitar 
showed her determination and passion for music.
 (iii) Moving to a new city was a life-altering event for Jagan, as it gave 
him the chance to make new friends and try different activities.
 (iv) Competing in the mar athon requires not just physical strength 
but also mental fortitude to stay focused and finish the race.
 (v) The lighthouse served as a beacon of hope  for the sailors lost  
at sea. 
 II Complete the following table by filling in the gaps with correct parts of 
speech mentioned. An example has been done for you. 
Nouns Adjectives Verbs (present) Adverbs
determination determined determine determinedly
relief relievedly
inspiring inspire
resistance resistantly
success successful
TRavel and advenTuRe
171
Unit 4.indd   171Unit 4.indd   171 07-Mar-25   1:52:32 PM07-Mar-25   1:52:32 PM
Reprint 2026-27


--- SOURCE PAGE 34 ---
 III Study the highlighted words in the following sentences from the text. 
 • Arunima made a vow that many would deem impossible.
 • Her father was an army engineer.
 • Standing at the top of the world, she felt a surge of emotions—pride, 
relief, and an overwhelming sense of achievement.
 • She planted the Indian flag at the summit and left behind a 
photograph of her idol, Swami Vivekananda.
 • Arunima Sinha’s journey from a devastating accident to scaling the 
highest peak in the world stands as a beacon of hope and resilience.
  The highlighted words are articles. 
  ‘A’ and ‘an’ are indefinite articles; ‘the’ is the definite article. The choice 
between ‘a’ and ‘an’ depends on the sound that follows the article, 
specifically the initial sound of the word that follows.
 1. Fill in the blanks with ‘a’, ‘an’, ‘the’. Put an ‘x’ where no article is 
required. 
  We planned (i) _______ adventurous trip to (ii) _______ remote island. 
(iii) _______ island was known for its beautiful landscapes and (iv) 
_______ diverse wildlife. On (v) _______ first day, we set out to explore 
(vi) _______ island’s dense jungle. (vii) _______ guide led us through 
(viii) _______ thick foliage and showed us (ix) _______ hidden waterfall. 
In (x) _______ evening, we gathered around (xi) _______ campfire to 
share stories and enjoy (xii) _______ meal we cooked. (xiii) _______ 
experience was truly unforgettable, and we felt (xiv) _______ 
connection with (xv) _______ nature. 
 2. There is an error in each sentence that has been underlined. Correct 
the error in the following sentences. 
 (i) We waited for a hour before the bus finally arrived. 
 (ii) The guide insisted on an uniform jacket for the group’s safety 
during the trek.
 (iii) Mount K2 is a second highest peak in the world. 
 (iv) A Ganga is a sacred river in India, known for its cultural 
importance.
 (v) Challenges are faced with courage and determination by a brave.
 (vi) A North Star has guided travellers for centuries.
PooRvi
172
Unit 4.indd   172Unit 4.indd   172 07-Mar-25   1:52:33 PM07-Mar-25   1:52:33 PM
Reprint 2026-27


--- SOURCE PAGE 35 ---
Travel and advenTure
173
 Let us listen
You will listen to five speakers share their opinion about adventure 
sports. As you listen match the statements 1–8 with the speakers 
(i)–(v). There are three extra statements that you do not need.  
(Transcript for the teacher on pg. 177)
 
 1. Talks about having basic activities in 
adventure sports
 2. Finds adventure sports thrilling and 
exciting
 3. Praises the availability of a variety of 
activities
 4. Expresses concern about the risks in 
adventure sports  
 5. Promotes trekking as a casual sport
 6. Invites applications from first-timers
 7. Focuses on the availability of training 
and supervision
 8. Finds exposure to risks unnecessary
  Statements   Speaker no.
 Let us speak 
In groups of four, select a role from 1–4 given below and speak about the 
views allotted to each. Use the prompts and vocabulary given. Take turns to 
express your opinions, agreement, and disagreement.
	 Role-Specific	Prompts
 1. School Student: Talk about why you think Physical Education should be 
included in school activities.
 2. Parent: Discuss your concerns or support for your child participating in 
Physical Education activities.
 3. Physical Education Teacher: Share your experiences about Physical 
Education activities and why you think they are valuable.
Unit 4.indd   173Unit 4.indd   173 07-Mar-25   1:52:33 PM07-Mar-25   1:52:33 PM
Reprint 2026-27


--- SOURCE PAGE 36 ---
Poorvi
 4. Sports Camp Organiser: Explain how you ensure safety and why you 
believe sports are beneficial for participants.
	 Prompts
 • In my opinion... • I believe that...
 • From my point of view... • I disagree with...
 • One reason for this is... • I agree with the idea that...
 • I disagree with the notion that...
 • I support this perspective because...
 • I find it hard to agree because...
Vocabulary you may use
precautions unique experiences fun safe enjoyable  thrilling
builds confidence concern  explore overcome fear participate
 Let us write
Read the various components of a formal letter from the box given below.
complimentary close receiver’s address subject date
introduction statement of request expression of interest
salutation signature line sender’s address
 1. Now, read the letter given below and write the matching components. 
  Sender’s Address
  Date
  Receiver’s Address 
  _________School
  Subject: Request to join Adventure Club
  Madam/Sir,
  I am Sreelakshmi, a student of Grade 7-C. I am interested 
in adventure activities like trekking, hiking, rope climbing, 
and exploring sites of natural beauty. 
  I would love to be a part of the Adventure Club of the school 
and participate in the adventure activities organised.
  I request you to grant me permission to join the club. 
  Yours sincerely,
  Sreelakshmi174
Unit 4.indd   174Unit 4.indd   174 07-Mar-25   1:52:34 PM07-Mar-25   1:52:34 PM
Reprint 2026-27


--- SOURCE PAGE 37 ---
        Let us	explore
 I Find out more information about the following adventure sports in our 
country and complete the table given below.
Name Area Preferred	Time	
of the Year
Equipment 
Required
snow skiing snow- covered 
hills skis, ski suit, 
trekking Spring, Autumn, 
Winter pole
camping grassy areas tent, torch, 
river rafting all year round
scuba diving scuba suit, 
mask, fins,
 II Prepare an information booklet with fact sheets of five Indian 
mountaineers. Include the following information in the fact sheet.
 1. name (and photograph, if available)
 2. place of birth 5. training received
 3. profession 6. sport known for (if any)
 4. accomplishments—awards or honours
2. Write a letter to the Principal of your school requesting her to organise an 
excursion to a nearby hill station for Grade 7 students of your school.
TRavel and advenTuRe
175
Unit 4.indd   175Unit 4.indd   175 07-Mar-25   1:52:34 PM07-Mar-25   1:52:34 PM
Reprint 2026-27


--- SOURCE PAGE 38 ---
Tunnel
 Let us listen (refer to page 153)
  A famous museum in your town is organising a treasure hunt in the 
museum premises. You and your friends decide to participate in it. Upon 
arrival, you find that there are many other teams. Each team is given an 
audio guide (recorded information) and a map to the museum. 
 1. Look at the map given below. Try and predict what each of the rooms 
might be. 
 2. Listen to the audio recording and as you listen, mark your map with the 
route to take to find the treasure. To help you, the names of a few rooms 
in the museum are given below. Now listen to the audio and mark the 
various rooms.
Welcome to the City Museum. We start our tour at the entrance 
hall. Here you will find the information booth and a display 
devoted to the history of this museum. To the right of the 
Entrance Hall you will find the (i) library. On the left is the 
museum shop. Go straight from the Entrance Hall till you reach 
the (ii) Art Gallery. The gallery is famous for its collection of rare 
paintings from various parts of India. There are three doors that 
lead out of the Art Gallery. The first door on the left leads to the 
Decorative Art Gallery, where you will find items like jewellery, 
carvings, and textiles from Medieval India. The next door is 
temporarily closed due to renovation work. The third door on 
the right leads to the (iii) Weapons Room, where you will find an 
extensive collection of Indian weapons including bows, swords, 
shields, and helmets. From the weapons room take a left turn. 
You will find the world-famous (iv) Musical Instruments Section, 
where you can find musical instruments from every country in 
the world. The second room to the left in this gallery will take 
you to the (v) Auditorium. Hidden here is your treasure! All the 
best to all. May the best team win!
TRANSCRIPTS
176
PooRvi
Unit 4.indd   176Unit 4.indd   176 07-Mar-25   1:52:35 PM07-Mar-25   1:52:35 PM
Reprint 2026-27


--- SOURCE PAGE 39 ---
Travel
 Let us listen (refer to page 162)
 1. Listen to this announcement made in the morning assembly about a 
school trip to the National Science Centre. As you listen, circle the words 
that are not correct. 
Good morning students!
I have some very exciting news to share with you all. The much-
awaited educational trip to the National Science Centre will be 
held on 16 September, that is in two weeks! As you know this 
would be a fantastic opportunity to explore and learn more 
about the world around us. 
We will be starting from school at 8.00 in the morning and return 
by 5.30 in the evening. All of you must be in proper school uniform. 
Don’t forget to carry your identity cards. Light refreshments will 
be provided at the museum. But do carry a water bottle and a 
packed lunch. You are not permitted to wear any jewellery or 
carry mobile phones. You may carry a notebook and a pen to 
make notes. Interested students must bring a permission slip 
signed by your parent and submit them to their class teachers 
by 10 September. It is going to be a fun trip so don’t miss out. If 
you have any more questions, please contact Mr. Mukherjee, the 
excursion in-charge. 
 2. Now, listen to the announcement again and rectify the sentences. 
Conquering The SummiT
 Let us listen (refer to page 173)
  You will listen to five speakers share their opinion about adventure 
sports. As you listen match the statements 1–8 with the speakers (i)–(v). 
There are three extra statements that you do not need.
Speaker (i):  As a parent, I fear the risks involved, especially 
with activities like rock climbing or paragliding.  
177
TRavel and advenTuRe
Unit 4.indd   177Unit 4.indd   177 07-Mar-25   1:52:35 PM07-Mar-25   1:52:35 PM
Reprint 2026-27


--- SOURCE PAGE 40 ---
I’m quite worried about the safety risks of adventure 
sports. It’s important to consider these risks before 
letting children participate.
Speaker (ii):  Adventure sports are thrilling! All my friends 
agree; it is amazing. It’s not just about fun; it’s about 
pushing your limits and experiencing something 
new. I think it’s worth trying, of course, with a 
trainer. 
Speaker (iii): As organisers of adventure camps, we take safety 
very seriously. Our team ensures all equipment is 
regularly checked and maintained. Participants are 
given thorough training and are always supervised 
by professionals. We focus on minimising risks 
while still providing an exciting experience.
Speaker (iv): At our school, we organise adventure camps with 
activities like trekking and zip-lining. However, we 
stick to basic sports that are safe and manageable 
for students. We always prioritise safety, ensuring 
that all necessary precautions and measures are in 
place. Being careful is what we promote.
Speaker (v): In my opinion, sports should be about fitness and 
enjoyment, like track and field or swimming. Why 
risk your life for a fleeting moment of thrill just for 
a feeling of adventure? Traditional sports are safer 
and just as fulfilling!
PooRvi
178
Unit 4.indd   178Unit 4.indd   178 07-Mar-25   1:52:36 PM07-Mar-25   1:52:36 PM
Reprint 2026-27
