Let us listen
 I Mrs. Shaw wanted Mary to learn to say the right thing. You will listen to 
a conversation between a mother and her son about basic manners. As 
you listen, fill in the blanks given below by selecting the correct option.  
(Transcript for the teacher on pg. 89 )
 1. How did the son behave in the grocery queue?
 (i) strangely (ii) impatiently (iii) politely
 2. The mother finally refers to her son as a __________________.
 (i) polite young man (ii) responsible son (iii) grateful person
 II You will once again listen to the conversation. As you listen, select four 
true statements from 1– 7 given below.
 1. The mother uses the grocery store incident as an opportunity to teach 
her son about patience and fairness.
 2. The son recognises the value of apologising and understands  that 
it shows he notices others.
 3. The son is gradually learning the importance of polite words and 
actions from his mother’s guidance.
 4. The mother discourages her son from speaking softly in public, 
suggesting that people should adjust to his voice level.
 5. The son feels that covering his mouth when coughing is only 
important when he’s at home.
 6. The son receives all advice readily while understanding its 
importance.
 7. The mother uses praise to support the polite behaviours she wants 
her son to continue practising.

Let us explore
 I Work in groups. Enact your favourite part of the play.
  Points to remember:
 • Allot a specific role to each member in the group. 
For example: director, narrator, and characters
Remember
The way we use stress and intonation in a sentence can change the 
meaning of what we wish to say if we are not careful.
86
 IV Now, speak the given declarative sentence with rising intonation towards 
the end of sentence and stress the highlighted words. 
  I saw Mrs. Cotter this afternoon.
Unit 2.indd   86Unit 2.indd   86 06-Mar-25   2:51:36 PM06-Mar-25   2:51:36 PM
Reprint 2026-27


--- SOURCE PAGE 45 ---
 • Include the actions and expressions as indicated 
in brackets in the play.
 II Find out how people greet guests who visit their 
homes in different languages. Share it with your 
classmates and the teacher. 
 III ‘Vasudhaiva Kuṭumbakaṁ’ (olq/So dqVqEcde) is a 
Sanskrit phrase which means the world is one family. Vasudha (olq/k) 
means Earth; eva (,o) translates to ‘is thus’ and Kuṭumbakaṁ (dqVqEcde) 
means ‘family’. The phrase originates from ancient Indian texts like 
the Maha Upanishad and the Hitopadesha.
  This saying highlights the interconnectedness of all people, 
suggesting that humanity is part of a single global family. It 
encourages unity, cooperation, and treating others with kindness 
and empathy, regardless of differences in nationality, race, or 
religion. The message is often used to promote global peace and 
mutual understanding among diverse cultures and nations. 
‘Vasudhaiva Kutumbakam’  was chosen as the theme for the G20 
Summit which captured the essence of global unity, common bonds, 
and shared aspirations for a better future.
87
Wit and Humour
Unit 2.indd   87Unit 2.indd   87 06-Mar-25   2:51:37 PM06-Mar-25   2:51:37 PM
Reprint 2026-27


--- SOURCE PAGE 46 ---
TRANSCRIPTS
AnimAls, Birds, And dr. dolittle

Let us listen (refer to page 55)
 I You will listen to an announcement. As you listen, state whether the 
following statement is true or false.
Greetings and attention everyone!
We are excited to announce the opening of Dr. John Dolittle’s 
new clinic in the town of Woodstock. The clinic is located at 
12, Rose Lane. It will be open Monday to Friday from 9 a.m. to  
5 p.m. Special timings for birds are on Saturdays from 11 a.m. to  
2 p.m. Dr. Dolittle is renowned for his ability to communicate 
with animals and shall ensure that they receive the best care 
possible. All animals are welcome, from horses and cows to pets 
and wild animals. For the best veterinary care, visit Dr. John 
Dolittle’s new clinic in Woodstock. 
Thank you.
 II You will listen to the announcement again. As you listen, complete the 
details given below with one or two exact words you hear.
A FUnny mAn

Let us listen (refer to page 65)
 I You will listen to a girl narrate a personal incident. As you listen, select 
the picture related to the narration. 
Hello. This is quite a funny incident. One day, I was so preoccupied 
with preparing for my presentation. After a long day of studying 
at a friend’s place, I finally came home. Exhausted, I removed 
my shoes at the door and headed straight to the kitchen for some 
88
Poorvi
Unit 2.indd   88Unit 2.indd   88 06-Mar-25   2:51:37 PM06-Mar-25   2:51:37 PM
Reprint 2026-27


--- SOURCE PAGE 47 ---
lunch. I served myself dal-chawal and ate it, still thinking about 
all the topics I needed to cover.
Once I finished my lunch, I got up to put my shoes away in my 
room and placed my plate in the kitchen. However, being so 
preoccupied, I ended up doing the opposite! I walked to my room 
with my plate in hand and left it on my desk. Then, I took my 
shoes and placed them in the kitchen!
As I stood there, confused, I realised what I had done. I couldn’t 
help but laugh at myself. I shook my head, recovered my shoes 
from the kitchen and kept the plate in the kitchen. 
 II You will once again listen to the girl narrate a personal incident. As you 
listen, arrange the events in order of occurrence. 
sAy the right thing

Let us listen (refer to page 84)
 I Mrs. Shaw wanted Mary to learn to say the right thing. You will listen to 
a conversation between a mother and a son about basic manners. As you 
listen, fill in the blanks given below by selecting the correct option.
mother : Why were you getting impatient in the grocery store?
son : Was I really? I just didn’t like waiting so long.
mother : I know waiting can be boring, but remember, we 
always stand in queues and wait for our turn. It’s fair 
for everyone, right?
son : Hmm, I guess. Even if it takes a lot of time?
mother : Well, that’s when we practise patience. And when it’s 
our turn, what do we say to the shopkeeper?
son : We say, ‘Thank you’. And ‘Please’ if we ask for something, 
right?
mother : Yes! Those are polite words. Why do you think they’re 
important?
Wit and Humour
89
Unit 2.indd   89Unit 2.indd   89 06-Mar-25   2:51:37 PM06-Mar-25   2:51:37 PM
Reprint 2026-27


--- SOURCE PAGE 48 ---
son      :  Maybe because they make people feel respected?
mother : Exactly! It shows gratitude and kindness. And what 
about yesterday when you bumped into that lady with 
the blue sari?
son : Oh, I said sorry right away. You alwa ys tell me it’s 
important to apologise.
mother : That’s true. Why do you think it’s important to 
apologise?
son : Um… so people know I didn’t mean to do it and that I 
care?
mother : Yes, it shows you’re responsible. And how about when 
we’re in places like the library? What kind of voice 
should we use?
son : Oh, I know this! We speak softly so we don’t bother 
others.
mother : Right again! It’s called using an ‘inside voice’.
son : I know. I also know that we should cover our mouth 
when we yawn, sneeze or cough in a gathering or a 
public place.
mother : Absolutely! You’re getting really good at remembering 
these things. And when we talk at home or school, what 
should we do when someone else is speaking?
son : We wait for our turn. It’s not well-mannered to 
interrupt.
mother : You’ve got it, Rohan. You’re becoming a really polite 
young man.
son : Thanks, Ma. So, do you think I’ll be ready to handle the 
grocery queue next time?
mother : Certainly! And maybe we can get some ice cream as a 
reward if you do it well.
son : Deal! And… thank you!
II  You will once again listen to the conversation. As you listen, select four 
true statements from 1–7 given below.
90
Poorvi
Unit 2.indd   90Unit 2.indd   90 06-Mar-25   2:51:38 PM06-Mar-25   2:51:38 PM
Reprint 2026-27