over the week in Table 3.1.
Table 3.1: Food items consumed over a week
data collected in Table 3.1? Do you eat the same kind of food
‹‹    In Table 3.2, add more states and fill the collected data.
Table 3.2: Some traditional food items in various states of India
Analyse the data collected by you in Table 3.2. Are there
Fig. 3.1: Change in cooking tools over time
cooking was done using a chulha (Fig. 3.1a). Nowadays, most
of us cook using a modern gas stove (Fig. 3.1b). Earlier, most
grinding was done manually using a sil-batta (Fig. 3.1c).
(Fig. 3.1d). Find out what were the other ways of cooking
wheat, rice, and maize, vegetables
Fig. 3.2: Some sources of carbohydrates       carbohydrates (Fig. 3.2).
Do you know that common
Yes, my grandma told           plants or animals (Fig. 3.3). Nuts,
Fig. 3.3: Some sources of fats
long winter sleep (hibernation), enabling them                    More to
peas and nuts (Fig. 3.4a). Animal sources of protein are milk,
paneer, egg, fish and meat (Fig. 3.4b). Protein-rich foods help
Fig. 3.4: Some sources of proteins                                      41
More to    mushrooms are good sources of protein.
fruits, vegetables and other plant-based foods in our daily
hard to get salt from seawater.                      More to
‹‹   Study the chart given in Fig. 3.5 to explore the functions
component       vegetables,                          shortness of
44                            Fig. 3.5: Chart of vitamins and minerals, their functions, some sources,
From Fig. 3.5, you have learnt that vitamins (A, B1, C
Fig. 3.6: Some sources of different vitamins
milk, green vegetables, fruits and wholegrains regularly.
These food items are some sources of vitamins (Fig. 3.6) and
vegetables? Have you ever noticed that vegetables
not be wise to include fruits and uncooked vegetables into
our diet? Washing cut or peeled vegetables and fruits may
recommended that all fruits and vegetables be thoroughly
Fruits and vegetables are rich in dietary fibres. Let us see
in our food is provided mainly by suitable plant products.
Green leafy         vegetables,                                 ulty in
Fig. 3.7: Testing for the presence of starch in various food items
iodine solution on each food item (Fig. 3.7).
observations in Table 3.3.
Record your observations in Table 3.3.
and mortar (Fig. 3.8).
Precautions
soda solution to each tube (Fig. 3.8).
Fig. 3.8: Testing for the presence of protein in various food items
Table 3.3.
What conclusions can you draw from Table 3.3? Which
Table 3.3: Exploring nutrients present in various food items
More to
and sanwa (Fig. 3.9).
of India (Fig. 3.9).
from these millets?                 Fig. 3.9: Sanwa (Barnyard millet)
in this process? Do you know how much time and effort is
in the farm? Let us look at Fig. 3.10 to understand the entire
Fig. 3.10: From farm to plate
involved in getting the food from farm to plate (Fig. 3.10).
5.   Medu does not eat vegetables but enjoys biscuits, noodles and
and put on a plaster. The doctor also gave him calcium tablets.
along with calcium tablets. Refer to Fig. 3.5 and answer the
(i)		 Why did the doctor give calcium tablets to Gourav?
syrup along with calcium tablets?
‹‹   Vegetables or fruits that grow naturally in the forest or