                                                                                             8



                                                                                   CHAPTER
                    Unity in Diversity, or
                    ‘Many in the One’
                      Oh, grant me my prayer, that I may never lose the bliss of
                      the touch of the one in the play of the many.
                                                           — Rabindranath Tagore


                      … The principle of unity in diversity which has always
                      been normal to [India] and its fulfilment the fundamental
                      course of her being and its very nature, the Many in
                      the One, would place her on the sure foundation of her
                      Swabhava and Swadharma.
                                                                 — Sri Aurobindo




                                                                                             8 – Unity in Diversity, or ‘Many in the One’




               The   Big                  1.   What is meant by ‘unity
                                               in diversity’ in the Indian
                    Questions                  scenario?
                                          2.   What aspects of India’s
                                               diversity are the most striking?
                                          3.   How do we make out the unity
                                               underlying the diversity?                     125




chapter8.indd 125                                                                                            03-02-2025 05:04:12
                                                              A Rich Diversity
                                                              If you travel through India by train, you will notice not
                                                              only changing landscapes but also many different types of
                                                              dresses and food; you will hear different languages, familiar
                                                              and unfamiliar, and see different scripts on the way. Even
                                                              within your own region, you will often come across people
                                                              from other parts of India with different customs and
                                                              traditions. This is India’s rich diversity, and it is usually the
                                                              first thing that strikes visitors to our country.
                                                              With over 1.4 billion inhabitants (about 18 percent of the
                                                              world’s population), such diversity is not surprising! In the
                                                              late 20th century, the Anthropological Survey of India, a
                                                              national organisation, conducted a massive survey called
                                                              ‘People of India project’ of 4,635 communities across all
                                                              States of the country. It counted 325 languages using 25
                                                              scripts; it also observed that many Indians may be called
                                                              migrants, in the sense of people not living near their
                                                              birthplace or with their original community.

                                                              LET’S EXPLORE
                                                              As a class activity, make lists of (1) the birthplaces of at least 5
                                                              classmates and the birthplaces of their parents; (2) the students’
                                                              mother tongues and other languages known to them. Discuss
             Our Cultural Heritage and Knowledge Traditions




                                                              the results in terms of diversity.


                                                              While diversity is indeed beautiful, making sense of it is not
             Exploring Society: India and Beyond




                                                              so easy. Over a century ago, the British historian Vincent
                                                              Smith wondered,
                                                                  “How, in the face of such bewildering diversity, can a
                                                                  history of India be written? … The answer to the query
                                                                  is found in the fact that India offers unity in diversity.”

                                                              What is meant by ‘unity in diversity’? How shall we perceive
                                                              and express this unity, or the ‘Many in the One’? To answer
             126                                              this question, we will explore a few dimensions of Indian life.




chapter8.indd 126                                                                                                                    03-02-2025 05:04:12
                    Food for All
                    Some of you will have eaten food from different regions of
                    India. The number of different dishes and preparations you
                    can taste in India must be in their thousands, if not lakhs!
                    Yet certain food grains are common to almost every part
                    of the country — cereals such as rice, barley and wheat;
                    millets such as pearl millet (bajra), sorghum (jowar), finger
                    millet (ragi); and pulses such as various kinds of dals and




                                             rajma


                                                 rajma

                                        white lobia


                                               basmati                                      rice
                                                                                                     pigeon pea
                                   moong
                                    dal         masoor dal
                                                                     rice
                                     chana dal                                   rice


                                                           millet
                                                                                     gram
                                               chickpea
                                                                     maize

                                   arhar dal
                                                                             maize
                                                                                                                  8 – Unity in Diversity, or ‘Many in the One’

                                               arhar dal

                                            jowar
                                                            sona masuri
                               millet
                                                           ponni rice

                             kollam rice


                                                      Not to scale

                    Fig. 8.1. A few examples of cereals and pulses from different regions of India                127




chapter8.indd 127                                                                                                      18-May-26 5:08:40 PM
                                                                      grams. All these are called ‘staple grains’ because they
                                                                      are the basic food for most Indians (Fig. 8.1 on page 127).
                                                                      Similarly, some common spices such as turmeric, cumin,
                                                                      cardamom and ginger, are also used throughout the
                                                                      country. We could continue this list with some common
                                                                      vegetables, common oils etc.
                                                                      So we see how the same ingredients (unity) can be used in
                                                                      a number of combinations (diversity) to prepare an endless
                                                                      variety of dishes!

                                                                      LET’S EXPLORE
                                                                      Æ As a class activity, make a list of ingredients (grains, spices,
                                                                           etc.) that are used in your home.
                                                                      Æ Take any one vegetable and think of the number of different
                                                                           dishes you can prepare with it.


                                                                      Textiles and Clothing
                                                                                               Every region and community in
                                                                                                 India has developed its own styles of
                                                                                                 clothing and dresses. Yet, we notice
                                                                                                  a commonality in some traditional
                                                                                                 Indian dresses, irrespective of the
                                                                                                 material used. An obvious example
             Our Cultural Heritage and Knowledge Traditions




                                                                                                 is the plain length of cloth called
                                                                                                 the sari, a type of clothing worn in
             Exploring Society: India and Beyond




                                                                                                 most parts of India and made from
                                                                                                 different fabrics — mostly cotton or
                                                                                                silk, but nowadays synthetic fabrics
                                                                                             too. Banarasi, Kanjivaram, Paithani,
                                                                                             Patan Patola, Muga or Mysore are some
                                                                                             of the famous types of silk saris. There
                                                              Fig. 8.2. Stone relief of a   are many more kinds of cotton saris.
                                                               woman in a sari from         Altogether, this unstitched piece of cloth
                                                              Vaiśhali (today in Bihar)
             128                                                                            comes in hundreds of varieties. They are




chapter8.indd 128                                                                                                                          03-02-2025 05:04:20
                    produced by different methods
                    of weaving (Fig. 8.3 on the
                    right) and designing. Some
                    designs are part of the cloth,
                    while others are printed after
                    the cloth is woven. Finally,
                    there are endless variations
                    in the colours, which are
                    produced from many kinds
                    of pigments.
                    The sari has a long history.
                    This stone relief (Fig. 8.2 on
                    page 128) from Vaiśhali (today
                    in Bihar) goes back a few
                    centuries BCE.

                     LET’S EXPLORE
                     Explain how the example of
                     the sari reflects both unity and
                     diversity (in 100-150 words).

                                                        Fig. 8.3. A few specimens of colourful traditional
                                                                          Indian textiles.
                       DON’T MISS OUT
                                                                                               Relief:
                     For a very long time, India produced the finest cotton in the             A design
                                                                                               that stands
                     world and Indian textiles were exported as far away as Europe.
                                                                                                              8 – Unity in Diversity, or ‘Many in the One’
                                                                                               out from
                     One beautiful type of printed cotton called ‘chintz’ became so            the surface
                     popular in 17th-century Europe that the sale of some European             of a panel
                                                                                               (which may
                     dresses dropped sharply. Eventually, to protect their own                 be of stone,
                     products, England and France decided to ban the import of                 wood,
                                                                                               ceramic or
                     chintz from India!
                                                                                               another
                                                                                               material).
                    There are many ways of wearing the sari, as they vary from
                    one region to another or from one community to another.
                    In fact, new ways of draping it are still being invented. But
                    in the end, it is a single dress — the sari. In past centuries,
                                                                                                              129




chapter8.indd 129                                                                                                             03-02-2025 05:04:21
                                          Fig. 8.4. Women often
                                           put the sari to many
                                          uses beyond that of a
                                                  dress (pictures
                                             from south India).




                                                               several travellers to India marvelled at its simplicity,
             Our Cultural Heritage and Knowledge Traditions




                                                               economy, and the diverse ways in which it is worn. In
                                                               addition, women often put the sari to many uses beyond
                                                               that of a dress; the six pictures in Fig. 8.4 above illustrate a
             Exploring Society: India and Beyond




                                                               few such creative uses.

                                                               LET’S EXPLORE
                                                               Æ In the above pictures, can you recognise what a sari has
                                                                 been used for?
                                                               Æ Are you aware of, or can you imagine, more uses for the
                                                                 sari?

             130




chapter8.indd 130                                                                                                                 03-02-2025 05:04:25
                    Æ Following the example of the sari, make a list of different
                      styles you have seen for the dhoti — both as regards the
                      fabric and the uses the dhoti can be put to. What conclusion
                                                                                     8 – Unity in Diversity, or ‘Many in the One’
                      can you draw?


                    Festivals Galore
                    There is an immense variety of festivals in India. You may
                    have noticed that a few common ones are celebrated across
                    India almost at the same time, though they have different
                    names. We will take just one example — Makara Sankrānti,
                    which marks the beginning of the harvest season in many
                                                                                     131




chapter8.indd 131                                                                                    03-02-2025 05:04:29
                                                                 parts of India on or around January 14. The map shows the
                                                                 different names of similar festivals across India about the
                                                                 same date.


                                                                  Shishur
                                                                Saenkraat



                                                                  Maghi/Lohri


                                                                                                                                Magh
                                                                                                                                Bihu
                                                                                                      Khichdi Parv



                                                                                        Makar
                                                                                       Sankraat
                                                              Uttarayan

                                                                                                                             Poush
                                                                            Makar                                            Songkranti
                                                                           Sankranti

                                                                                                                     Makara Sankranti



                                                                                                        Pedda
                                                                                                       Panduga
                                                                  Makara
                                                              Sankramana
             Our Cultural Heritage and Knowledge Traditions




                                                                    Makara                        Pongal
                                                                    Vilakku
             Exploring Society: India and Beyond




                                                                                            Not to scale


                                                                Fig. 8.5. Different names of similar festivals across India about the same date


                                                                 LET’S EXPLORE
                                                                 Æ What is your favourite festival and how is it celebrated in
                                                                   your region? Do you know whether it is celebrated in any
                                                                   other part of India, maybe under a different name?
             132




chapter8.indd 132                                                                                                                                 18-May-26 5:10:20 PM
                    Æ During October–November, many major festivals take
                      place in India. Make a list of the few main ones and their
                      various names in different parts of the country.


                    An Epic Spread
                    Literature offers us another fine illustration of unity in
                    diversity. Indian literatures are extremely diverse (and
                    among the most abundant in the world). Over centuries,
                    despite differences in language, technique, etc., they have
                    shared important themes and concerns. Who has not
                    heard of the Pañchatantra, for example? This collection
                    of delightful stories, with animals as the main characters,
                    teaches us important life skills. The original Sanskrit text is
                    at least 2,200 years old, but its stories have been adapted in
                    almost every Indian language. In fact, they have travelled
                    well beyond India, all the way to Southeast Asia, the Arab        Epic:
                    world and Europe, inspiring new collections of stories on         A long poem
                    the way — it is estimated that about 200 adaptations of           generally
                                                                                      narrating the
                    the Pañchatantra exist in more than 50 languages! This            adventures
                    illustrates how ‘one’ collection of stories has become ‘many’.    of heroes and
                                                                                      other great
                    The most striking case, however, is that of India’s two epics     figures of the
                    — the Rāmāyaṇa and the Mahābhārata.                               past.


                      These two Sanskrit epics, which together might fill
                      some 7,000 pages in their original versions, narrate the
                                                                                                   8 – Unity in Diversity, or ‘Many in the One’
                      stories of heroes who fight to re-establish dharma. In the
                      Mahābhārata, the Pāṇḍavas, with Kṛiṣhṇa’s help, fight
                      their own cousins, the Kauravas, to recover their kingdom.
                      In the Rāmāyaṇa, Rāma, with the help of his brother
                      Lakṣhmaṇa and of Hanuman, defeats the demon Rāvaṇa,
                      who had kidnapped his wife Sītā. These stories contain
                      many shorter ones that focus on values, and constantly
                      ask questions about what is right and what is wrong.



                                                                                                  133




chapter8.indd 133                                                                                       09-Apr-26 4:32:55 PM
                                                              Fig. 8.6. Yuddha Kanda of Ramayana, Sahibdin, Mewar, 1652, India
                                                                                   Office Library, London


                                                                  LET’S EXPLORE
                                                                  In a class discussion, try to identify the episode depicted in
                                                                  the painting shown in Fig. 8.6 above and important details
                                                                  associated with it.

                                                                  For more than two millenniums, these two epics have been
             Our Cultural Heritage and Knowledge Traditions




                                                                  translated or adapted into regional literatures in India
                                                                  and beyond. In addition, there are countless folk versions
                                                                  of them. A few years ago, a scholar conducted a survey in
             Exploring Society: India and Beyond




                                                                  Tamil Nadu alone and counted “about a hundred versions
                                                                  [of the Mahābhārata] that have come down to us in folklore
                                                                  forms.” Imagine what the number might be for the whole
                                                                  of India!
                                                                  In fact, many communities have their own versions of the
                                                                  Rāmāyaṇa and the Mahābhārata. They have also preserved
                                                                  legends connecting their own history with these epics. This
             134
                                                                  is especially true of tribal communities in many parts of




chapter8.indd 134                                                                                                                  09-Apr-26 5:01:55 PM
                    India, such as the Bhils, the Gonds, the
                    Mundas and many more. Most tribes
                    of India’s northeast and Himalayan
                    regions, including Kashmir, have
                    had their own version of one or the
                    other of the two epics, or both. These
                    tribal adaptations are transmitted
                    orally, along with legends on how
                    the heroes of the Rāmāyaṇa and the
                    Mahābhārata (generally any or all of
                    the five Pāṇḍavas, their wife Draupadī,
                    but also sometimes their cousin and
                    adversary Duryodhana) visited the
                                                                    Fig. 8.7. ‘Pañcha Pāṇḍavar’,
                    tribes’ respective regions.                   a carved stone in a forest of the
                                                               Nilgiris, Tamil Nadu, depicting the
                    The anthropologist K.S. Singh directed      five Pāṇḍava brothers. The shrine
                    the ‘People of India’ project we referred  containing this stone is maintained
                                                                 by Irula tribals to commemorate
                    to earlier (see page 126). In the case of     the Pāṇḍavas’ passing through
                                                                               the area.
                    the Mahābhārata, he observed, “There
                    is hardly a place in the country which
                    the epic heroes such as the Pandavas, did not visit according
                    to folklores.” And the same may be said of the Rāmāyaṇa.
                    Over the centuries, perhaps more than any other texts,
                    these two epics created a dense web of cultural interactions
                    across India and many parts of Asia. Another example of
                    unity in diversity.
                                                                                                      8 – Unity in Diversity, or ‘Many in the One’
                    To further illustrate the theme of this chapter, we could
                    have continued our journey and turned to more facets
                    of Indian culture. For instance, in India’s classical arts,
                    including classical architecture, both diversity and unity
                    are easily noticeable. (You will study these fields through
                    the Art Curricular Area.)
                    In the end, we should remember that Indian culture
                    celebrates diversity as an enrichment, but never loses sight
                    of the underlying unity which nourishes that diversity.                           135




chapter8.indd 135                                                                                                     03-02-2025 05:04:32
                                                              Before we move on ...
                                                              Æ    India offers immense diversity in its landscapes, people,
                                                                   languages, dresses, foods, festivals and customs.
                                                              Æ    Diversity is easy to perceive in many fields, but there is also an
                                                                   underlying unity.
                                                              Æ    India’s unity celebrates diversity because diversity does not
                                                                   divide — it enriches.


                                                              Questions, activities and projects
                                                              1.   Conduct a class discussion on the two quotations at the start of
                                                                   the chapter.
                                                              2.   Select a few stories from the Pañchatantra and discuss how their
                                                                   message is still valid today. Do you know of any similar stories
                                                                   from your region?
                                                              3.   Collect a few folk tales from your region and discuss their
                                                                   message.
                                                              4.   Is there any ancient story that you have seen being depicted
                                                                   through a form of art? It could be a sculpture, a painting, a
                                                                   dance performance, a movie … Discuss with your classmates.
                                                              5.   Discuss in class the following quotation by India’s first prime
                                                                   minister, Jawaharlal Nehru, when he travelled to many parts of
                                                                   India before Independence:
                                                                        “Everywhere I found a cultural background which had
             Our Cultural Heritage and Knowledge Traditions




                                                                        exerted a powerful influence on their lives. … The old epics
                                                                        of India, the Ramayana and the Mahabharata and other
                                                                        books, in popular translations and paraphrases, were widely
             Exploring Society: India and Beyond




                                                                        known among the masses, and every incident and story and
                                                                        moral in them was engraved on the popular mind and gave
                                                                        a richness and content to it. Illiterate villagers would know
                                                                        hundreds of verses by heart and their conversation would
                                                                        be full of references to them or to some story with a moral,
                                                                        enshrined in some old classic.”



             136




chapter8.indd 136                                                                                                                       03-02-2025 05:04:32
