--- SOURCE PAGE 1 ---
GANITA PRAKASH
Textbook of Mathematics
Grade
7
Part – I
Reprint 2026-27


--- SOURCE PAGE 2 ---
First Edition
April 2025 Chaitra 1947
Reprinted
January 2026 Magha 1947
PD 945T BS
©	National Council of Educational 
Research and Training, 2025
` 65.00
ALL RIGHTS RESERVED
	 No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system 
or transmitted, in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, 
photocopying, recording or otherwise without the prior permission of the 
publisher.
	 This book is sold subject to the condition that it shall not, by way of trade, 
be lent,  re-sold, hired out or otherwise disposed of without the publisher’s 
consent, in any form of binding or cover other than that in which it is published.
	 The correct price of this publication is the price printed on this page, Any revised 
price indicated by a rubber stamp or by a sticker or by any other means is 
incorrect and should be unacceptable.
Publication Team
Head, Publication	
:	 M.V. Srinivasan
Division
Chief Editor 	
:	 Bijnan Sutar
Chief Business	
:	 Amitabh Kumar
Manager 
Chief Production	
:	 Deepak Jaiswal
Officer (In charge)
Production Assistant	
:	 Sahitya Sharma
Cover and Layout
Creative Art Studio and Chetan Sharma 
Illustrations
Chetan Sharma and Madhusree Basu
OFFICES OF THE PUBLICATION 
DIVISION, NCERT
NCERT Campus
Sri Aurobindo Marg
New  Delhi 110 016	 	
Phone :  011-26562708
108, 100 Feet Road 
Hosdakere Halli Extension
Banashankari III Stage
Bangaluru 560 085	
	
Phone : 080-26725740
Navjivan Trust Building
P.O.Navjivan 
Ahmedabad 380 014		
Phone :  079-27541446
CWC Campus
Opp. Dhankal Bus Stop
Panihati
Kolkata 700 114	
	
Phone :  033-25530454
CWC Complex
Maligaon  
Guwahati 781 021	
	
Phone :  0361-2674869	
0774 – Ganita Prakash
Textbook of Mathematics for Grade 7
ISBN 978-93-5729-983-1
Printed on 80 GSM paper with NCERT 
watermark
Published at the Publication Division 
by the Secretary, National Council of 
Educational Research and Training, 
Sri Aurobindo Marg, New Delhi 110 016 
and printed at Infinity Advertising Services 
Pvt. Ltd., Plot No 171-172, Sector 58, 
Faridabad 121004


--- SOURCE PAGE 3 ---
FOREWORD
The National Education Policy 2020 envisages a system of education in the 
country that is rooted in an Indian ethos and its civilisational accomplishments 
in all fields of knowledge and human endeavour. At the same time, it aims 
to prepare students to engage constructively with the opportunities and 
challenges of the 21st century. The basis for this aspirational vision has been 
well laid out by the National Curriculum Framework for School Education 
(NCF-SE) 2023 across curricular areas at all stages. By nurturing students’ 
inherent abilities across all five planes of human existence (pañchakośhas), 
the Foundational and Preparatory Stages set the stage for further learning 
at Middle Stage. Spanning Grades 6 to 8, the Middle Stage serves as a critical 
three-year bridge between the Preparatory and Secondary Stages. 
The NCF-SE 2023, at the Middle Stage, aims to equip students with the 
skills that are needed to grow, as they advance in their lives. It endeavours 
to enhance their analytical, descriptive, and narrative capabilities, and to 
prepare them for the challenges and opportunities that await them. A diverse 
curriculum, covering nine subjects ranging from three languages — including 
at least two languages native to India — to Science, Mathematics, Social 
Science, Art Education, Physical Education and Well-being, and Vocational 
Education promotes their holistic development. 
Such a transformative learning culture requires certain essential 
conditions. One of them is to have appropriate textbooks in different curricular 
areas, as these textbooks will play a central role in mediating between content 
and pedagogy — a role that will strike a judicious balance between direct 
instruction and opportunities for exploration and inquiry. Among the other 
conditions, classroom arrangement and teacher preparation are crucial to 
establish conceptual connections both within and across curricular areas.
The National Council of Educational Research and Training, on its part, is 
committed to providing students with such high-quality textbooks. Various 
Curricular Area Groups, which have been constituted for this purpose, 
comprising notable subject-experts, pedagogues, and practising teachers as 
their members, have made all possible efforts to develop such textbooks. 
Ganita Prakash, the textbook of Mathematics for Grade 7, Part I, aligns with 
the expectations of NEP 2020 and NCF-SE 2023, with respect to creating a 
spark for initiating mathematical thinking. This textbook designed for Grade 
7 students, takes forward its journey through the world of mathematics that 
started in Grade 6. During this journey the concepts and problems emerge 
from daily life situations and so it is expected that students will be able to 
relate to them with ease. The book makes efforts to encourage the students 
to observe and explore the patterns around them and discover mathematical 
concepts on their own. The content attempts to integrate mathematics with 
other subject areas such as science, social science with cross-cutting themes 
like environmental education, value education, inclusive education, and 
Indian Knowledge Systems (IKS). Colourful illustrations and interactive 
exercises form the basis of this textbook that would develop a strong 
foundation among children in understanding more complex mathematical 
Reprint 2026-27


--- SOURCE PAGE 4 ---
iv
concepts. Throughout the book, stories, conversations and anecdotes have 
been incorporated to make abstract mathematical concepts more relatable 
and accessible to young learners. Puzzles and innovative problems will not 
only engage the students in thoughtfully relating the mathematical concepts 
to the world around them and help them in deepening their understanding 
of mathematics, but also prepare them to understand the concepts of the 
emerging field of computational thinking. The focus is on collaboration and 
active engagement through student-centered approach to education. 
However, in addition to this textbook, students at this stage should also be 
encouraged to explore various other learning resources. School libraries play 
a crucial role in making such resources available. Besides, the role of parents 
and teachers will also be invaluable in guiding and encouraging students to 
do so. 
With this, I express my gratitude to all those who have been involved in 
the development of this textbook and hope that it will meet the expectations 
of all stakeholders. At the same time, I also invite suggestions and feedback 
from all its users for further improvement in the coming years.
Dinesh Prasad Saklani 
Director 
New Delhi
National Council of Educational 
March 2025
Research and Training 
Reprint 2026-27


--- SOURCE PAGE 5 ---
ABOUT THE BOOK
Mathematics helps students develop not only basic arithmetic skills, but 
also the crucial capacities of logical reasoning, creative problem solving, 
and clear and precise communication (both oral and written). Mathematical 
knowledge also plays a crucial role in understanding concepts in other 
school subjects, such as Science and Social Science, and even Arts, Physical 
Education, and Vocational Education. Learning Mathematics can also 
contribute to the development of capacities for making informed choices and 
decisions. Understanding numbers and quantitative arguments is necessary 
for effective and meaningful democratic and economic participation. 
Mathematics thus has an important role to play in achieving the overall aims 
of school education.
Mathematics at the Middle Stage is a major challenge and has to perform 
the dual role of being both close to the experience and environment of the 
child and being abstract. It must perform the dual role of developing intuition 
while also maintaining and emphasising rigour. It must perform the dual 
role of enhancing critical and logical thinking while also developing artistry 
and creativity and a sense of elegance and aesthetics. Finally, Mathematics 
must perform the dual role of providing students plenty of opportunities for 
exploration and discovery of concepts on their own while also teaching best-
known methods in the global repertoire of mathematics.
The present textbook has made an attempt to address the above mentioned 
goals and challenges of learning mathematics. The writers of this book have 
aimed to strike a judicious balance between informal and formal definitions 
and methods to develop in students both intuition and rigour. The book also 
provides numerous opportunities for student-student and student–teacher 
interaction in the classroom to promote active and experiential learning. A 
number of questions, puzzles, and interactive exercises are posed throughout 
the book to encourage constant exploration. Many of the questions are open-
ended to stimulate in-class discussion.
The first chapter of this book, ‘Large Numbers Around Us’, is an introduction 
to the world of lakhs and crores, and millions and billions through engaging 
explorations and contexts. 
Chapter 2, ‘Arithmetic Expressions’, considers expressions having multiple 
operations and discusses how they can be written and read without ambiguity. 
Chapter 3, ‘A Peek Beyond the Point’, introduces the usage of the decimal 
point and additions and subtractions involving decimal numbers. Chapter 
4, ‘Expressions using Letter-Numbers’ builds on the chapter on Arithmetic 
Expressions to guide students to take the first steps into the world of algebra. 
The fundamental notions of letter-numbers and algebraic expressions are 
introduced. Chapter 5, ‘Parallel and Intersecting Lines’, introduces some 
fundamental building blocks of geometry and has a balance of engaging 
activities like paper folding and rigorous mathematical reasoning. Chapter 
6, ‘Number Play’, covers aspects of computational thinking and problem 
solving through puzzles and concepts of parity, the Virahāṅka-Fibonacci 
sequence, and cryptarithms. Chapter 7, ‘A Tale of Three Intersecting Lines’, 
Reprint 2026-27


--- SOURCE PAGE 6 ---
vi
explores, through construction, some of the striking properties of a triangle 
related to the lengths of their sides and angles. Chapter 8, ‘Working with 
Fractions’, builds on the students’ understanding of fractions, and explores 
the multiplication and division of fractions. The methods and formulas of 
the great Indian mathematician Brahmagupta (628 CE) for performing these 
operations on fractions is brought alive with fresh examples and interesting 
puzzles. In all chapters, an attempt has been made to emphasise connections 
with other subjects including Art, History, and Science.
By weaving together storytelling and hands-on activities, we hope that 
an immersive learning experience will be created that ignites curiosity and 
fosters a love for mathematics. It is hoped that teachers would give children 
the opportunity to discuss, play, engage with each other, provide logical 
arguments for different ideas, and find loopholes in arguments presented. 
This is necessary for the learners to eventually develop the ability to 
understand what it means to prove something and also become confident 
about underlying concepts. The mathematics classroom should not expect a 
blind application of algorithms but should rather encourage children to find 
many different ways to solve problems.
As per the NEP 2020, computational thinking has also been gently 
introduced through puzzles, games, and interactive exercises that encourage 
such thinking. Indian rootedness has also been kept in mind while giving 
contexts for different concepts. The contributions of Indian mathematicians 
have been given as part of a problem-solving approach to make students 
aware of India’s rich mathematical heritage and its global contributions to 
mathematics.
The concepts and problems are related to daily life situations. An attempt 
has been made to use contexts and materials with which the students are 
familiar. Learning material sheets have been given at the back of the book 
that may be photocopied and used. At many places, exercises or activities are 
given to encourage peer group efforts and discussions. The textbook intends 
to address the learning needs of a diverse group of students in the classroom.
We have tried to link concepts learnt in initial chapters with ideas in 
subsequent chapters to show the connectedness and unity of mathematics. 
We hope that teachers will use this as an opportunity to revise these concepts 
in a spiralling way so that children are able to appreciate the entire conceptual 
structure of mathematics. We hope that teachers may give more time to 
the ideas of fractions, negative numbers and other notions that are new to 
students. Many of these are the basis for further learning in mathematics.
Finally, this book aims to be more than just a textbook—it’s a passport 
to a world of mathematical discovery and exploration. Whether used in the 
classroom or at home, we hope that it may inspire students to embark on 
their own mathematical adventures, empowering them to see the beauty 
and relevance of mathematics in everything around them. With its engaging 
approach and comprehensive coverage of Grade 7 mathematics concepts, 
this book hopes and aims to captivate young minds and set them on a lifelong 
journey of mathematical discovery.
Reprint 2026-27


--- SOURCE PAGE 7 ---
vii
I thank again all the writers of and contributors to this textbook for this 
important and valuable contribution and service to the nation’s mathematics 
teachers, learners and enthusiasts.
We look forward to your comments and suggestions regarding the book 
and hope that you will send interesting exercises, activities and tasks that 
you develop during the course of teaching and learning, to be included in 
future editions.
Ashutosh Wazalwar
Professor, Academic Convener
Department of Education in
Science and Mathematics
National Council of Educational 
Research and Training
Reprint 2026-27


--- SOURCE PAGE 8 ---
NATIONAL SYLLABUS AND 
TEACHING LEARNING MATERIAL 
COMMITTEE (NSTC)
1.	 M.C. Pant, Chancellor, National Institute of Educational Planning and 
Administration (NIEPA), (Chairperson)
2.	 Manjul Bhargava, Professor, Princeton University, (Co-Chairperson)
3.	 Sudha Murty, Acclaimed Writer and Educationist
4.	 Bibek Debroy, Chairperson, Economic Advisory Council to the Prime 
Minister (EAC – PM)
5.	 Shekhar Mande, Former Director General, CSIR, Distinguished Professor, 
Savitribai Phule Pune University, Pune
6.	 Sujatha Ramdorai, Professor, University of British Columbia, Canada
7.	 Shankar Mahadevan, Music Maestro, Mumbai
8.	 U. Vimal Kumar, Director, Prakash Padukone Badminton Academy, Bengaluru
9.	 Michel Danino, Visiting Professor, IIT – Gandhinagar
10.	 Surina Rajan, IAS (Retd.), Haryana, Former Director General, HIPA
11.	 Chamu Krishna Shastri, Chairperson, Bharatiya Bhasha Samiti, Ministry 
of Education
12.	 Sanjeev Sanyal, Member, Economic Advisory Council to the Prime 
Minister (EAC – PM)
13.	 M.D. Srinivas, Chairperson, Centre for Policy Studies, Chennai
14.	 Gajanan Londhe, Head, Programme Office
15.	 Rabin Chhetri, Director, SCERT, Sikkim
16.	 Pratyusa Kumar Mandal, Professor, Department of Education in Social 
Sciences, NCERT, New Delhi
17.	 Dinesh Kumar, Professor, Department of Education in Science and 
Mathematics, NCERT, New Delhi
18.	 Kirti Kapur, Professor, Department of Education in Languages, NCERT, 
New Delhi
19.	 Ranjana Arora, Professor and Head, Department of Curriculum Studies 
and Development, NCERT (Member-Secretary)
Reprint 2026-27


--- SOURCE PAGE 9 ---
TEXTBOOK DEVELOPMENT TEAM
Contributors
Aaloka Kanhere, Project Scientific Officer, Homi Bhabha Center for Science 
Education, Mumbai
Amartya Kumar Dutta, Professor, Stat-Math Unit, Indian Statistical Institute 
(ISI), Kolkata
Anjali Gupte, Principal (Retd.), Vidya Bhavan Public school, Udaipur
Aparna Lalingakar, Director, Aksharbrahma Consultancy, Pune — (Team Leader)
Ashutosh Kedarnath Wazalwar, Professor, Department of Education in 
Science and Mathematics, NCERT, New Delhi — CAG (Mathematics) 
Member Coordinator
Geetanjali Phatak, Professor, S. P. College, Pune 
H. S. Sharada, TGT, Government High School, HD Kote, Karnataka
K. V. Subrahmanyam, Professor, Chennai Mathematical Institute (CMI), Chennai
Kiran Barve, Faculty, Bhaskaryacharya Partisthan, Pune
Madhavan Mukund, Director, Chennai Mathematical Institute, Chennai —  
CAG Chairperson (Mathematics)
Madhu B., Assistant Professor, Regional Institute of Education (RIE), Mysuru
Manjul Bhargava, Professor, Princeton University, and Co-Chairperson, NSTC
Padmapriya Shirali, Former Principal, Sahyadri School KFI, Pune
Patanjali Sharma, Assistant Professor, Regional Institute of Education, (RIE), Ajmer
Rakhi Bannerjee, Associate Professor, Azim Premji University, Bengaluru
Ramchandar Krishnamurthy, Principal, Azim Premji School, Bengaluru
Shivkumar K. M, Senior Consultant, Programme Office, NSTC
Shravan S. K., Senior Consultant, Programme Office, NSTC
Sujatha Ramdorai, Professor, University of British Columbia, Canada, 
Member NSTC
V.M. Sholapurkar, Adjunct Professor, Bhaskaryacharya Pratisthan, Pune 
Vijayan K., Professor, Department of Curriculum Studies and Development, 
NCERT, New Delhi 
Reviewers
Anurag Behar, Member, National Curriculum Framework Oversight Committee
K. (Ravi) Subramaniam, Professor (Retd.), Homi Bhabha Centre for Science 
Education (HBCSE), Mumbai
Reprint 2026-27


--- SOURCE PAGE 10 ---
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The National Council of Educational Research and Training (NCERT) 
acknowledges the guidance and support of the esteemed Chairperson and 
members of the Curricular Area Group (CAG): Mathematics and other concerned 
CAGs for their guidelines on cross-cutting themes in developing this textbook. 
During the development of this textbook, various workshops were organised 
and subject experts in Mathematics from different Institutions were invited. 
The NCERT acknowledges the valuable views and inputs given by subject 
experts — Shailesh A. Shirali, Director, Teacher Education Program, a Valley 
School, KFI; Sadik Ali Shaikh, Head, Department of Mathematics, Maulana 
Azad College of Arts, Science and Commerce, Aurangabad, Maharashtra; 
Jaspal Kaur, TGT (Maths), School of Excellence, Delhi; Bina Prakash, Senior 
PGT Mathematics, Campion School, Bhopal; Mahendra Shankar, Senior 
Lecturer (Retd.), NCERT, New Delhi; Shaily Choudhary, TGT Mathematics, 
GGSSS, Khajoori Khas, Delhi; Ravi Raxit Sharma, TGT Mathematics, GCMS, 
New Seelampur, Delhi; Poonam Arora, PGT Mathematics, Mentor Teacher, 
SBV, West Patel Nagar, New Delhi; Shalini Arora Bahri, TGT Maths, SKV No.1, 
Narela, Delhi; Sangeeta Solanki, TGT Mathematics, The Heritage School, Delhi; 
Sunita Sharma, TGT Mathematics, The Heritage School, Delhi, Rishikesh 
Kumar, Assistant Professor, DESM, NCERT, New Delhi; Ishita Mukherjee, CBSE 
Resourse Person, Delhi; Tarun Choubisa, Programme Office, NSTC — for 
improving the content and pedagogy of the textbook.
The Council acknowledges the efforts of Nidhi M. Shastri and Bhawana 
Upadhyay from the Programme Office.
The page number design draws inspiration from the Prime Climb game by 
Math For Love. The Council acknowledges Chaitanya Dev and Ramu MS for 
providing the pictures of the Decimal Coinage stamps.
The Council acknowledges the academic and administrative support of 
Sunita Farkya, Professor and Head, DESM, NCERT, New Delhi.
The Council appreciates the contributions of Sushmita Joshi, Senior 
Research Associate; Manju Mhar, Senior Research Associate; Department of 
Education in Science and Mathematics, NCERT, for providing support in the 
development of the textbook.
The contribution of Ilma Nasir, Editor (contractual); Aastha Sharma, 
Editorial Assistant (contractual); Adiba Tasneem, Jatinder Kumar and 
Talha Faisal Khan, Proofreaders (contractual), Publication Division is also 
appreciated. The NCERT gratefully acknowledges the contributions of 
Pawan Kumar Barriar, In charge, DTP Cell; Kishore Singhal, Vivek Mandal, 
Vipan Kumar Sharma and Bittu Kumar Mahato DTP Operator (contractual), 
Publication Division, NCERT for all his efforts in laying out this book.
Reprint 2026-27


--- SOURCE PAGE 11 ---
NOTE TO THE TEACHER
We hope that this book, Ganita Prakash, will serve as a strong support and 
guide to you in achieving the exciting task that you have before you: that of 
passing on the joy of learning the beautiful subject of Mathematics to the next 
generation.
This task calls for providing a fertile environment that allows for the 
flowering of mathematical thinking in the minds of students. Classrooms, 
where students just listen and write down whatever is being told to them or 
written on the board, are deficient in the conditions required for learning 
mathematics. Instead, classrooms need to be places where students are 
engaged in playing with mathematical concepts, finding and discussing 
patterns, and developing creative strategies together to solve problems. 
Students should also be posing problems to each other and discussing possible 
solutions with each other. In fact, these are the very conditions that have 
led to the development of the entire field of mathematics so far, and so one 
cannot expect students to pick up mathematical thinking and understanding 
without these conditions.
Fortunately, it is not difficult to create such conditions in the classroom. 
It just requires an interesting question, problem, pattern, or challenge to be 
thrown open to the students on a regular basis, and sufficient time to be given 
to them to play with, discuss, and work on it as a class or in pairs or groups.
Along with it, an environment that accepts mistakes and acknowledges 
their importance in learning needs to be nurtured. 
While creating the spark for initiating mathematical thinking in 
classrooms is not difficult, sustaining it may be challenging and may involve 
efforts from your side. Nevertheless, even if just the first part of throwing 
open a question, problem, pattern, or challenge is done at least once or twice 
a week, accompanied by sufficient waiting time from your side for students 
to play, discuss, and work on it, it can have a great positive impact on how the 
students view and approach mathematics.
It should be noted that this positive impact will not happen overnight. That 
takes time and depends on various factors such as the number of opportunities 
you give for problem solving, your patience, and the encouragement you give 
to the students.
To support you in posing problems, all the problems or questions in this 
book are marked using the icon 
. This icon is an indicator of a potential 
opportunity to start off a process of problem solving and exploration in the 
classroom. You will find some of the problems labelled “Math Talk”. Such 
questions can especially be made as topics for classroom discussion.
An owl mascot appears at various points in the textbook to highlight 
important mathematical processes, ways of thinking, and problem-solving 
approaches. These can be brought out during classroom discussions, both 
where the owl is present and also in other similar situations.
Reprint 2026-27


--- SOURCE PAGE 12 ---
xii
To develop students’ mathematical thinking and understanding of 
concepts, a sufficient number of problems are given. Trying to “cover” all 
of them must not happen at the cost of students not getting to spend quality 
time on playing with and discussing them.
It is important to understand that the exploratory problems are not 
only for promoting problem solving skills; they also serve in strengthening 
procedural fluency when children start engaging in exploration.
Efforts must be made in making students independent learners. One 
essential aspect required for this is an ability to read and understand 
mathematical text. To promote this skill, students should be encouraged to 
read the book by themselves and in groups. Give opportunities to them to 
interpret what they read and express it to others. This will also address the 
big problem that students face in speaking mathematics and interpreting 
word problems.
This book contains a number of open-ended problems. It also contains 
new treatments of certain concepts. If you are not able to solve them or 
follow some of them immediately, it is perfectly okay! Not everyone knows 
everything. Along with trying to understand and reflect upon such content, 
it will be very useful to take it to the classroom and open it up for discussion. 
After the discussion, things that are clear and those that are not yet clear 
can be clearly summarised. This process itself can throw a lot of light on the 
content.
In these discussions, you can participate as a fellow seeker, and when 
students see a teacher seek and think to understand something, it sets a 
wonderful example for them.
It is hoped that you and your students will have a great and fruitful time 
using this book!
Summary of Key Points
Time for Exploration
1.	 It is important to routinely pose new problems, questions, patterns, or 
challenges to the students and give them sufficient time to play with, 
discuss, and work on them, individually and in groups.
2.	 During this time, an environment that accepts mistakes and 
acknowledges their importance in learning needs to be nurtured.
3.	 There should be a culture where students pose problems to each other 
and discuss with each other various ways to approach the problems.
About the Problems in the Book
1.	 The exploratory problems in the book not only promote problem 
solving; they also aim to strengthen procedural fluency when children 
start engaging in exploration.
Reprint 2026-27


--- SOURCE PAGE 13 ---
xiii
2.	 Trying to ‘cover’ all the problems in the book must not happen at the 
cost of students not getting to spend quality time on playing with, 
discussing, and solving them.
Reading
1.	 Encourage students to read the book by themselves and in groups.
2.	 Give opportunities to them to interpret what they read and to express 
it to others.
Right of Not Knowing!
1.	 It is perfectly okay if some of the content is not understood immediately. 
Along with trying to understand and reflect upon such content, it can 
also be taken to the classroom and opened up for discussion. After 
the discussion, things that are clear and those that are not yet clear 
can be clearly summarised. In these discussions, you can participate 
as a fellow seeker, and when students see a teacher seek and think to 
understand something, it sets a wonderful example for them!
2.	 Learning is a continual process. Indeed, there is so much in 
mathematics that is still not known and requires further exploration!
Reprint 2026-27


--- SOURCE PAGE 14 ---
CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
Part III (Articles 12 – 35)
(Subject to certain conditions, some exceptions
and reasonable restrictions)
guarantees these
Fundamental Rights
Right to Equality
• before law and equal protection of laws;
• irrespective of religion, race, caste, sex or place of birth;
• of opportunity in public employment;
• by abolition of untouchability and titles.
Right to Freedom
• of expression, assembly, association, movement, residence and profession;
• of certain protections in respect of conviction for offences;
• of protection of life and personal liberty;
• of free and compulsory education for children between the age of six and fourteen years;
• of protection against arrest and detention in certain cases.
Right against Exploitation
• for prohibition of traffic in human beings and forced labour;
• for prohibition of employment of children in hazardous jobs.
Right to Freedom of Religion
• freedom of conscience and free profession, practice and propagation of religion;
• freedom to manage religious affairs;
• freedom as to payment of taxes for promotion of any particular religion;
• freedom as to attendance at religious instruction or religious worship in educational
institutions wholly maintained by the State.
Cultural and Educational Rights
• for protection of interests of minorities to conserve their language, script and culture;
• for minorities to establish and administer educational institutions of their choice.
Right to Constitutional Remedies
• by issuance of directions or orders or writs by the Supreme Court and High
Courts for enforcement of these Fundamental Rights.
Reprint 2026-27


--- SOURCE PAGE 15 ---
A NOTE TO STUDENTS!
To be able to appreciate the art of mathematics, it is not enough to just be a 
passive spectator. You need to immerse yourself in its process like a detective 
getting into action to solve a mystery.
This is especially required when you see a new question or when a 
question arises from your own sense of wonder, or when you come across a 
new beautiful pattern. When you encounter these, pause your reading, and 
use your creativity to work out the question or understand and appreciate 
the pattern.
You will find that some questions are accompanied by their answers. Even 
if this is the case, it is worthwhile to work on the problems by yourself or in 
a group before you see the answer.
This will enrich your experience of going through the book!
Whenever there are questions coming up, you will see this icon: 
. This 
indicates that it is time for figuring things out!
Sometimes you will find many questions collected together in a single 
place under the title ‘Figure it Out’.
Some questions are marked 
Math 
Talk
. These questions are meant to be
discussed and worked out with your friends.
Finally, there are questions marked 
Try
This
. These questions demand 
more creativity to be answered, and therefore will also often be more fun to 
answer as a result!
Reprint 2026-27


--- SOURCE PAGE 16 ---
Constitution of India
Fundamental Duties
It shall be the duty of every citizen of India —
(a) to abide by the Constitution and respect its ideals and institutions, the
National Flag and the National Anthem;
(b) to cherish and follow the noble ideals which inspired our national
struggle for freedom;
(c) to uphold and protect the sovereignty, unity and integrity of India;
(d) to defend the country and render national service when called upon to
do so;
(e) to promote harmony and the spirit of common brotherhood amongst
all the people of India transcending religious, linguistic and regional
or sectional diversities; to renounce practices derogatory to the dignity 
of women;
(f)
to value and preserve the rich heritage of our composite culture;
(g) to protect and improve the natural environment including forests, lakes,
rivers, wildlife and to have compassion for living creatures;
(h) to develop the scientiﬁ c temper, humanism and the spirit of inquiry
and reform;
(i)
to safeguard public property and to abjure violence;
(j)
to strive towards excellence in all spheres of individual and collective
activity so that the nation constantly rises to higher levels of endeavour
and achievement;
* (k) who is a parent or guardian, to provide opportunities for education
to his child or, as the case may be, ward between the age of six and 
fourteen years.
Note:  The Article 51A containing Fundamental Duties was inserted by the Constitution (42nd 
Amendment) Act, 1976 (with eﬀ ect from 3 January 1977).
*(k) was inserted by the Constitution (86th Amendment) Act, 2002 (with eﬀ ect from 
1 April 2010).
Part IV A (Article 51 A)
Reprint 2026-27


--- SOURCE PAGE 17 ---
CONTENTS
Foreword
iii
About the Book	
v
Note to the Teacher	
xi
A Note to Students	
xv
Chapter 1 	
Large Numbers Around Us	
1
Chapter 2	
Arithmetic Expressions	
24
Chapter 3	
A Peek Beyond the Point	
46
Chapter 4	
Expressions using Letter-Numbers	
81
Chapter 5	
Parallel and Intersecting Lines 
106
Chapter 6	
Number Play	
127
Chapter 7	
A Tale of Three Intersecting Lines	
146
Chapter 8	
Working with Fractions	
173
Learning Material Sheets	
200
Reprint 2026-27


--- SOURCE PAGE 18 ---
Reprint 2026-27
