Let us discuss
 I Complete the table given below based on Scene I of the play. An example 
has been done for you. Share your answers with your classmates and the 
teacher.
Speaker Words of the Speaker Reason
Mrs. Shaw The room looks cleaner 
now. Put that coat away in 
your bedroom.
To instruct Mary to keep 
the room tidy
Mary You’re always telling me to 
put things away.
I’m not a child!
Mrs. Shaw To highlight the 
importance of being kind 
as a way to ensure Mary 
says the appropriate things 
when guests arrive
 II Do you think Mary will be able to follow her mother’s advice successfully 
when Mrs. Harding and Mrs. Lee visit? Why or why not?
Scene II 
74
Unit 2.indd   74Unit 2.indd   74 06-Mar-25   2:51:30 PM06-Mar-25   2:51:30 PM
Reprint 2026-27


--- SOURCE PAGE 33 ---
Wit and Humour
75
mrS. SHaW : So you like Lanfield, Mrs. Harding! I’m very glad.
mrS. Harding : Yes, we like it very much. It’s not the same as 
London, but there are some very nice people 
here, and we’ve found a good house. (No one says 
anything more, and Mrs. Shaw looks at Mary.)
mary : What beautiful children you have, Mrs. Harding! 
I’ve often seen them walking along the road.
mrS. Harding : Oh, I haven’t any children.
mary : Oh, yes, you have! I’ve seen them: a little boy and 
a little girl.
mrS. Harding : (not very pleased) I have no children; believe me. 
mary : Oh!
mrS. SHaW : (quietly) They must be someone else’s children. 
Have you met Mr. Best? He’s a nice man. He lives 
near you.
mary : Oh, Mr. Best! He lives here and he works in 
London. He goes all the way to London by train 
every morning, and then he comes all the way 
back by train every night. He lives in trains! (she 
laughs) What kind of life is that? Why do people 
do things like that? They do not know how to live. 
And he reads two newspapers in the train every 
day. He never reads a book. But he’s only a banker, 
and bankers can’t think. 
mrS. Lee : My brother’s a banker. He goes to London by train 
every morning and comes back every night. He 
reads two newspapers in the train in the morning, 
and another every night.
mary : Oh, I’m sorry. I didn’t know.
mrS. SHaW : Bankers always have to read a lot of newspapers. 
Do you know Mrs. Best? She’s a nice woman. I like 
her.
mary : But have you seen her clothes? She goes out in a 
blue dress with a red coat over it. (she laughs)
Unit 2.indd   75Unit 2.indd   75 06-Mar-25   2:51:30 PM06-Mar-25   2:51:30 PM
Reprint 2026-27


--- SOURCE PAGE 34 ---
Poorvi
mrS. Harding : I have a blue dress, and I often put on my red coat 
at the same time.
mrS. SHaW : (quickly) I like blue dresses and red coats. (No one 
says anything.)
mary : I saw Mrs. Cotter this afternoon. I met her in the 
street. No one sees her in the morning because she 
always stays in bed then. And she’s always asking 
the doctor to go to see her. I can’t understand 
women who stay in bed in the morning. And why 
must she always ask for the doctor? I’ve never 
been to a doctor in my life.
mrS. Harding : I stay in bed in the morning myself.
mrS. Lee : I often go to the doctor.
mary : Oh, I’m sorry. (No one speaks.)
mrS. SHaW : Do you know Mrs. Grantley? She’s 
one of my best friends.
mary :  But she’s so talkative! 
Talkative women aren’t 
very interesting, are they? 
mrS. Lee : My mother’s a very 
talkative woman.
mary :  Oh, I’m sorry. I didn’t know. 
(No one says anything.)
mary : (looking out of the window ): 
Oh, there’s that dog again! It 
always looks very dirty. I don’t 
like dogs, do you? Who wants 
a dog? That dog’s always near 
our house. Why do people 
keep dogs? Who wants a dog? 
Why doesn’t its owner keep it 
clean? Have you seen it?
mrS. H arding : ( looking out of 
the window ) Yes, I’ve seen it. 
That’s Towzer. It’s our dog.
76
Unit 2.indd   76Unit 2.indd   76 06-Mar-25   2:51:32 PM06-Mar-25   2:51:32 PM
Reprint 2026-27


--- SOURCE PAGE 35 ---
Wit and Humour
77
mary : (with a red face) Oh, I didn’t know! (No one speaks.)
mary : (still looking out of the window ) There’s Mr. 
Pomeroy on his horse. He’s always talking about 
horses. He rides a horse every day, and practises 
shooting. Why must he do that? What have they 
done to Mr. Pomeroy? Why do some men like 
horses more than they like people? It’s hard to 
understand men.
mrS. Lee : My brother practises shooting when he has the 
time, and he rides his horse when he can. He sold 
his house in London and bought a house here 
because he wanted to ride and practise shooting. 
mrS. Harding : (looking at Mrs. Lee ) It’s getting a little late. We 
must go now, Mrs. Shaw. It has been very nice to 
have a little talk. (She looks at Mary.)
mrS. Lee : Very nice. (She looks at Mary.)
mrS. SHaW : It was very good of you to come to see us. Please 
stay a little longer. 
mary : (unable to say the right thing even now )  Oh, must 
you stay? Can’t you go?
g.C. tHornLey

Let us discuss
 I Rectify the false statements given below from Scene II of the play.  
An example has been done for you. Share your answers with your 
classmates and the teacher.
 1. Mrs. Harding states that they do not like London as it is not the same 
as Lanfield.
  Rectification: Mrs. Harding states that they like Lanfield very much 
even though it is not the same as London.
 2. Mrs. Harding was pleased to know that Mary was familiar with her 
children.
 3. Mrs. Shaw shared that she lik ed Mrs. Best as she read a lot of 
newspapers.
 4. Mrs. Harding and Mrs. Shaw agree that wearing a blue dress with a 
red coat is unfashionable.
 5. Mary shares that she finds the dog outside the window cute.
Unit 2.indd   77Unit 2.indd   77 06-Mar-25   2:51:32 PM06-Mar-25   2:51:32 PM
Reprint 2026-27


--- SOURCE PAGE 36 ---
Poorvi
78

Let us think and reflect
 I Read the extracts given below and answer the questions that follow.
 1. Mary : What are you going to talk about?
  Mrs. shaw : I don’t know. All kinds of things. One day you’ll have to 
go to some of these houses yourself and talk to the people 
there.
  Mary : I can talk now. I’ve been able to talk for a long time.
  Mrs. shaw : Yes, that’s true. You always talk too much. But does anyone 
want to hear the things that you say?
  Mary : I can talk very well when I like. I’ll stay with you toda y and 
talk to them when they come.
  Mrs. shaw : Oh, I don’t think so. You can go out for a walk. It will be 
better if you do that. 
 (i) What does Mrs. Shaw imply when she says, “One day you’ll have 
to go to some of these houses yourself and talk to the people 
there”?
 A. She believes Mary should start learning about hosting  
guests then.
 B. She thinks Mary is ready to visit these houses independently.
 C. She wants Mary to develop social skills for the future.
 D. She hopes Mary will avoid these social interactions entirely.
 (ii) Complete the following sentence with the correct option from 
the brackets.
  Mrs. Shaw and Mary are discussing how to _____________________. 
(have a polite conversation/ get to know people better)
 (iii) Why did Mary insist on staying with her mother when the guests 
arrived?
 (iv) Match the following character traits to the char acters in the 
extract: 
 A. eager B. inexperienced C. cautious
  Mary  Mrs. Shaw
Unit 2.indd   78Unit 2.indd   78 06-Mar-25   2:51:33 PM06-Mar-25   2:51:33 PM
Reprint 2026-27


--- SOURCE PAGE 37 ---
Wit and Humour
79
 2. Mary : I saw Mrs. Cotter this afternoon. I met her in the street. 
No one sees her in the morning because she always 
stays in bed then. And she’s always asking the doctor 
to go to see her. I can’t understand women who stay in 
bed in the morning. And why must she always ask for 
the doctor? I’ve never been to a doctor in my life.
  Mrs. harding : I stay in bed in the morning myself.
 (i) Complete the following sentence suitably.
  Mary could spot Mrs. Cotter in the street because _________. 
 (ii) What does Mary’s comment about Mrs. Cotter sta ying in bed and 
calling the doctor suggest about her understanding?
 A. She is worried about why Mrs. Cotter stays in bed all morning.
 B. She is unable to understand why people need medical help.
 C. She thinks Mrs. Cotter is scared and lonely for sta ying in bed.
 D. She believes Mrs. Cotter is right to rest and take care of herself.
 (iii) How can we say that Mary enjoyed good health?
 (iv) Identify whether the following statement is true or false.
  Mary might have unintentionally offended Mrs. Harding. 
 II Answer the following questions.
 1. What does Mary’s comment about Mr. Best’ s routine and profession 
reveal about her viewpoint on bankers and their way of life?
 2. What can we infer about Mary’s understanding of polite conversation 
based on her interactions with the guests?
 3. What do you think the repeated stage direction ‘no one speaks’ 
indicates about the atmosphere in the room when Mary speaks?
 4. How does Mary’s attitude towards the guests change throughout  
the play?
 5. What do Mrs. Harding’s and Mrs. Lee’s responses to Mary’ s blunders 
during their visit reveal about their characters?
 6. In what way does the play show the importance of knowing how to 
engage in polite conversation?
Unit 2.indd   79Unit 2.indd   79 06-Mar-25   2:51:33 PM06-Mar-25   2:51:33 PM
Reprint 2026-27


--- SOURCE PAGE 38 ---