                                         Heat Transfer
                         7                 in Nature
                    Pema and her brother Palden reside in Gangtok. On a cold winter
                    evening, they are sitting around a ﬁreplace. Palden shares his
                    experiences of visiting Kerala during the winter vacation. He
                    says that compared to Gangtok, winter in Kerala is comparatively
                    warm and humid. Both Pema and Palden are curious about why
                    some places are so cold and others quite hot.
                       Hearing them express their curiosity, their grandfather, a
                    retired science teacher, says, “Kerala is closer to the equator than
                    Sikkim and it also has a long coastline, which results in warmer
                    and more humid weather conditions”. Palden replies, “Yes, we
                    learnt in Grade 6 Science and Social Science that for us on the
                    Earth, the Sun is the main source of heat and light, and around
                    the equator, the climate is generally hot”.
                       As they are talking, Pema is keenly observing her grandmother
                    cooking thukpa (a traditional Sikkimese dish) in a large metal
                    pan. Pema asks, “Why are cooking utensils generally made of
                    metals?” Palden immediately responds that they had studied
                    in the chapter ‘The World of Metals and Non-metals’ that such
                    materials are good conductors of heat.




                                                        Reprint 2026-27


Chapter 7.indd 89                                                                          4/3/2025 4:53:55 PM
                                                                                        How does heat get
                                                                                        transferred in these
                                                                                        materials?




                                                                        Let us perform an activity to learn why certain materials are
                                                                     good conductors of heat.

                                                                      7.1 Conduction of Heat

                                                                       Activity 7.1: Let us experiment

                                                                     Caution — This activity should be carried out under the supervision of
                                                                     a teacher or an adult.

                                                                                            Take a strip of a metal, such as aluminium
                                                     Stand     Pin              Metal        or iron, about 15 cm long.
                                                                                strip
                                                                                            Attach four pins to the strip with the help
                                                                                             of wax such that they are arranged at
                                                                                             nearly equal distances (about 2 cm apart),
                                                                                             as shown in Fig. 7.1.
                                                                                            Secure the strip to a stand and label the
                                                                                Burning
                                                                                 candle      pins as I, II, III, and IV, as shown in Fig. 7.1.
                                                                                             (If a stand is not available, place the strip
                                                                                             between two bricks for support.)
 Curiosity | Textbook of Science | Grade 7




                                                                                            Heat the end of the strip that is away from
                                             Fig. 7.1: Heat transfer in a metal strip
                                                                                             the stand with a candle or a spirit lamp.
                                                                       What will happen to the pins? Will they remain attached to
                                                                        the strip or will they fall?
                                                                       Predict the order in which the pins will fall from the strip.
                                                                       Record your observations in Table 7.1.

                                                                  Table 7.1: Falling of pins

                                                                                  Pin falling ﬁrst
                                                                                                                   Reasons for what you
                                                                       Prediction                                       observed
                                                                                              Observation



 90

                                                                                           Reprint 2026-27


Chapter 7.indd 90                                                                                                                                4/3/2025 4:53:57 PM
                                                                                                           91
                        You observed that the pin closest to the candle ﬂame (pin I)
                    falls ﬁrst, followed by pins II, III, and IV. Why does pin I fall before
                    pin II? Why did all the pins not fall together?




                                                                                                             Heat Transfer in Nature
                        From your observations, what can you infer? Do you think
                    that heat is being transferred along the metal strip from the
                    end that is being heated? As the heat travels along the strip and
                    approaches a pin, the wax holding it melts and the pin falls. Here,
                    the transfer of heat takes place from the hot end of the strip to the
                    colder end. The process of heat transfer from the hotter part of
                    an object to the colder part is called conduction. In this process,
                    the particle that gets heated, passes the heat on to its neighbour,
                    and so on. However, the particles themselves do not move from
                    their positions.
                        Materials like metals that allow heat to pass through them
                    easily are called good conductors of heat. Because metals are
                    good conductors of heat, we use utensils made of metals for
                    cooking. In solids, heat transfer takes place mainly through the
                    process of conduction.
                        If we use a strip made of a material like wood or glass in place
                    of a metal strip to perform Activity 7.1, the pins will not fall. Can
                    you think of the reason for this based on our learning from the
                    chapter ‘The World of Metals and Non-Metals’?
                        Materials such as glass and wood do not
                    allow heat to pass through them easily and Now, I know, why we
                    are poor conductors (insulators) of heat. generally use metal
                    Clay and porcelain are also poor conductors utensils for cooking,
                    of heat — that is why tea or coﬀee kept in whereas we prefer clay
                    such cups stays hot longer.                        and porcelain cups for
                                                                       drinking tea or coﬀee.
                        List some materials around you and
                    classify them as good or poor conductors
                    of heat in Table 7.2.
                     Table 7.2: List of good or poor conductors of heat

                     S.No.            Material         Good or Poor conductor of heat

                      1.      Steel                   Good conductor

                      2.      Wood

                      3.

                       Does your list include air? If it is there on the list, where have
                    you placed it?
                       You must have experienced that during winters, we prefer
                    wearing woollen clothes to keep ourselves warm.


                                                         Reprint 2026-27


Chapter 7.indd 91                                                                               4/3/2025 4:53:57 PM
                                                                                                    Woollen fabric traps air in its pores
                                                                                                and as air is a poor conductor of heat,
                                                                                   Air          it reduces heat flow from our bodies to
                                                                                                our surroundings. As a result, we feel
                                                                                                warm. Similarly, air trapped between
                                                                                                the layers of clothing acts as a poor
                                                                                                conductor of heat and keeps us warm.
                                                                                                The presence of air between two thin
                                                                                                blankets is the reason why we prefer
                                              Fig. 7.2: Air trapped between two thin blankets   them over one thick blanket to keep
                                                              acts as an insulator              us warm (Fig. 7.2).
                                                                       Is it possible to construct houses that are not affected much
                                                                   by the outside heat and cold? Houses constructed in places with
                                                                   a very hot or cold climate often use the concept of heat transfer
                                                                   to keep them cool or warm.

                                                           Fascinating Facts
                                                           The upper regions of the Himalayas, such as the Mori block of Uttarkashi
                                                           in Uttarakhand, experience an extremely cold climate and heavy
                                                           snowfall during winters. Houses here are often built to stay warm
                                                           during winters, with walls made of two wooden layers filled with cow
                                                           dung and mud between them. As wood and mud are poor conductors
                                                           of heat, they prevent heat loss and help in keeping the houses warm.


                                                                  There are houses with outer walls that are constructed using
                                                               hollow bricks that keep them warm in winters and cool in
                                                               summers. This happens because the air that gets trapped in the
                                                               hollow bricks is a poor conductor of heat.
                                                                                       Pema draws Palden’s attention to the
 Curiosity | Textbook of Science | Grade 7




                                                               Why is the smoke    rising smoke from the burning firewood,
                                                               going up?           around which they are sitting.

                                                                  7.2 Convection
                                                               To understand why smoke rises, let us perform an activity.
                                             Wooden
                                              stick                                  Activity 7.2: Let us investigate

                                                                                      Take two identical paper cups.
                                             Thread
                                                                                      Hang them using threads of equal length in
                                              Paper                                    an inverted position on the two ends of a
                                               cup                                     wooden stick, as shown in Fig. 7.3a.
                                                       Fig. 7.3(a): Initial set-up


 92

                                                                                      Reprint 2026-27


Chapter 7.indd 92                                                                                                                           24-Sep-25 1:19:20 PM
                                                                                                                                        93
                                                                                                         Wooden
                      Now, adjust the positions of the cups,                                             stick
                       so that the stick is horizontal.




                                                                                                                                          Heat Transfer in Nature
                      Place a burning candle below one of                                                   Thread
                       the cups (Fig. 7.3b).                                                             Paper cup
                      Observe what happens to the cup.
                                                                                                             Burning
                      Record your observations in Table 7.3                                                  candle
                       and think of probable reasons.
                                                                            Fig. 7.3(b): Hot air rising up

                     Table 7.3: Recording observations and probable reasons

                     Observation about the cups      Probable reasons for the observation




                        You observed that the cup under which the candle
                    was placed, rises up (Fig. 7.3b). Why is it so? The air
                    around the candle ﬂame heats up. As the air in the
                    cup warms up, it expands and occupies more space.                                                  Inﬂated
                                                                                                                       balloon
                    As a result, it becomes lighter and rises up.
                        You can experience the expansion of air on
                    heating it by placing a partially inﬂated balloon in
                    the Sun (Fig. 7.4). After the air in the balloon gets
                    heated, it expands and the balloon becomes larger.
                                                                               Fig. 7.4: An inﬂated
                        You must have observed that when an incense             balloon in the Sun
                    stick (agarbatti) is burnt, smoke rises up. Smoke is a
                    mixture of hot gases and tiny solid particles that are released
                    when something burns. As it is warmer than the surrounding air,
                    it rises up.
                        Let us ﬁnd out how heat transfer How does heat transfer
                    takes place in liquids by performing take place in liquids?
                    the following activity.                     Do liquids also rise up
                                                                    when heated like air?
                      Activity 7.3: Let us ﬁnd out

                    Caution — This activity should be carried out under the supervision of
                    a teacher or an adult.
                      Take a 500 mL beaker, half-ﬁlled with water as shown in
                       Fig. 7.5a.
                      With the help of a straw, place a grain of potassium
                       permanganate at the centre of the beaker’s base (Fig. 7.5a).
                      Place a candle right below the centre of the base of the beaker.




                                                          Reprint 2026-27


Chapter 7.indd 93                                                                                                            4/3/2025 4:53:59 PM
                                                                                Observe the movement of the coloured streak in the
                                              Straw                              water.
                                             Beaker                             As you supply heat, a streak of colour starts moving
                                             Water                               up and then coming down from the sides (Fig. 7.5b).
                                             Tripod                              Why does the streak of coloured water go up in the
                                              stand                          middle and come down from the sides? The water at the
                                         Candle                              bottom of the beaker gets heated up and becomes hot.
                                                                             It expands, becomes lighter, and rises. The water on the
                                                 Fig. 7.5(a): Initial set-up sides of the beaker is comparatively cooler and heavier,
                                                    for demonstration        and comes down to take the place of the rising water.
                                                                             Then, this water gets heated and in turn also rises.
                                                                                 This cycle continues until the entire volume of water
                                       Coloured                              gets heated. In this case, the entire volume of water gets
                                          streak                             heated through the actual movement of water particles.
                                                                             This process of heat transfer is known as convection. It
                                                                             is because of convection that we see the movement of the
                                        Burning                              coloured streak inside the beaker.
                                         candle
                                                                                 Thus, we can conclude that water, like air, gets heated
                                                                             up by the process of convection. Here, heat transfer takes
                                             Fig. 7.5(b): Demonstration of
                                                                             place by the actual movement of particles of liquids and
                                              convection in heated water gases from one place to another.


                                                                    7.2.1 Land and Sea Breeze
                                                                    Palden shares his experience of visiting a beach in Kerala during
                                                                    winter vacation and says, “During the day, the sand or soil near
                                                                    the beach is hotter than the water in the sea. However, at night,
                                                                    the sand or soil is cooler than the water.” Pema replies, “Yes,
 Curiosity | Textbook of Science | Grade 7




                                                                    diﬀerent objects get heated and cooled diﬀerently.”
                                                                    Let us check how land and water get heated and cooled by
                                                                    performing an activity.

                                                                      Activity 7.4: Let us investigate
                                                                               Caution — This activity should be carried out on a clear,
                                                                               sunny day under the supervision of a teacher or an adult.
                                                                                 Take two identical bowls as shown in Fig. 7.6.
                                                  Stand
                                                                                 Fill one bowl halfway with soil and the other bowl
                                                                                  halfway with water.
                                               Thermometer
                                                                                 Fix a laboratory thermometer in each bowl as
                                                                                  shown in Fig. 7.6. Make sure that the bulbs of the
                                                             Soil   Water
                                                                                  thermometer are immersed in soil and water, and
                                                                                  do not touch the bottoms or the sides of the bowls.
                                                Fig. 7.6: Measurement of the
                                               temperature of soil and water     Place the set-up in sunlight.
 94

                                                                                         Reprint 2026-27


Chapter 7.indd 94                                                                                                                          4/3/2025 4:54:01 PM
                                                                                                                      95
                      Measure the temperature of soil and water every 5 minutes
                       and record the data in Table 7.4.




                                                                                                                        Heat Transfer in Nature
                     Table 7.4: Temperature of soil and water when heated

                     S.No.   Time (min)      Temperature of                Temperature of
                                                soil (°C)                    water (°C)

                       1.         0
                       2.         5
                       3.         10

                       4.         15
                       5.         20

                      Study the rise in temperature of soil and water.
                      Did the temperature rise by the same amount for both the
                         soil and the water at the same time?
                      If not, which one got heated faster?
                      How much was the rise in temperature of the soil and the
                         water in 20 minutes?
                       After 20 minutes, you will ﬁnd that the temperature of the
                    soil rises more than that of the water. This indicates that the soil
                    heats up faster than water.
                       Does the soil also cool faster than water? After letting the soil
                    and water get heated, bring the set-up indoors and let it cool for
                    20 minutes. You will observe that
                    the soil cools faster than water,
                    just as it gets heated faster.                           Warm air

                       People living in coastal
                    areas experience an interesting
                    phenomenon caused by the
                    heating and cooling of land and
                    water at diﬀerent rates. As the
                    land gets heated faster than water                                                     Warmer
                    during the day, it causes warm                                          Cool sea breeze land
                    air above the land to rise. This         Cooler sea
                    causes cooler air to move from
                    the sea towards the land. This
                    movement of cooler air from the                          Fig. 7.7(a): Sea breeze
                    sea to the land is called sea breeze
                    (Fig. 7.7a). Hence, in hot places, sea breeze relieves people from
                    the heat. That is why, windows of the houses in coastal areas are
                    placed facing the sea.



                                                         Reprint 2026-27


Chapter 7.indd 95                                                                                          4/3/2025 4:54:01 PM
                                                                                                                 At night, the process
                                                                  Warm air                                    reverses. In the absence of
                                                                                                              sunlight, land cools down
                                                                                                              faster than the water in the
                                                                                                              sea. As a result, the air above
                                                                                                              the sea is warmer and rises
                                                                                                              up. Cooler air from the land
                                                                                                     Cooler   then moves towards the
                                             Warmer sea
                                                                                                      land    sea, creating a land breeze
                                                                                                              (Fig. 7.7b).
                                                          Cool land
                                                           breeze                                                Thus, people living near
                                                                                                              the seashore experience that
                                                              Fig. 7.7(b): Land breeze                        the direction of the wind
                                                                                                              reverses in the day and night.

                                                                7.3 Radiation
                                                             Do you remember when Pema and Palden were sitting around
                                                             the ﬁreplace? They felt warm.
                                                                                      Their grandfather tells them that the
                                                                I wonder how heat transfer, in this case, takes place
                                                                heat from the directly from the ﬁre (hot object) to us by a
                                                                ﬁre reaches us?    process known as radiation. The heat of the
                                                                                   Sun reaches us through this process. Heat
                                                             transfer by radiation does not require any medium.
                                                                 All objects radiate heat. You must have observed that a hot
                                                             utensil kept away from the ﬂame cools down after some time.
                                                             What is the reason for it? The hot utensil cools down by radiating
 Curiosity | Textbook of Science | Grade 7




                                                             heat to its surroundings.




                                                     DIVE
                                                      EEPER
                                                                      Why is it more comfortable to wear white or light-coloured
                                                                      clothes during summers and dark-coloured clothes during
                                                                      winters?

                                                                      Light-coloured clothes reﬂect most of the heat that falls on
                                                                      them, and therefore, we feel more comfortable wearing
                                                                      them during summers. Dark surfaces, on the other hand,
                                                                      absorb more heat, and therefore, we feel more comfortable
                                                                      with dark-coloured clothes during winters.




 96

                                                                                         Reprint 2026-27


Chapter 7.indd 96                                                                                                                               4/3/2025 4:54:03 PM
                                                                                                                          97
                        There are many examples in our daily life, where we can
                    observe conduction, convection, and radiation happening
                    together.




                                                                                                                            Heat Transfer in Nature
                        Consider the case of water being heated up, as
                    shown in Fig. 7.8. Let us identify the various ways in
                    which the pan and the water get heated up, as well
                    as the warmth we feel around the ﬂame and the hot
                    pan. Heat is transferred from the ﬂame to the utensil
                    by conduction. Subsequently, water in the utensil
                    gets heated up by convection. The warmth that we
                                                                            Fig. 7.8: Heating water in a pan
                    feel around the ﬂame and the hot utensil is due to
                    radiation.
                    Let us wrap up!
                    From the activities, examples, and discussions so far, we ﬁnd that
                    there are three processes by which heat gets transferred. These
                    are conduction, convection, and radiation.
                      In conduction, heating takes place when one particle receives
                         heat, transfers heat to the next particle in contact, and so
                         on. The particles themselves do not move away from their
                         positions.
                      In convection, heat transfer takes place by the actual
                         movement of particles.
                      Note that in conduction and convection, a medium must be
                         present whose particles help in the transfer of heat.
                      In the case of radiation, heat travels from one place to
                         another and no material medium is required for its transfer.


                           FASCINATING FACTS
                           In the upper reaches of the Himalayan
                           region, a traditional room heater locally
                           known as bukhari is used to keep rooms
                           warm during winters. It consists of an iron
                           stove in which wood or charcoal is burnt.
                           A long pipe attached to the upper part of
                           the heater serves as a chimney, venting
                           out the smoke. Additionally, the bukhari
                           can be used for cooking, as its ﬂat top
                           provides a platform for placing utensils.
                           All the three processes of heat transfer
                           are involved when this device is used for
                           cooking and warming up the room.                       Bukhari




                                                         Reprint 2026-27


Chapter 7.indd 97                                                                                              4/3/2025 4:54:04 PM
                                                                 You have learnt in the Grade 6 Science textbook Curiosity, that
                                                              the Sun is the main source of heat for the Earth. You have seen
                                                              your parents drying wet clothes on the clothesline at home. Wet
                                                              clothes dry faster on a sunny day since the heat from the Sun
                                                              makes the evaporation of water faster.
                                                                 Thus, heat from the Sun plays an important role in the
                                                              evaporation of water, be it from clothes drying on a line or from
                                                              water bodies like oceans and lakes. Let us look at the phenomenon
                                                              of water cycle to understand this in more detail.

                                                                7.4 Water Cycle
                                                               You have also learnt in the Grade 6 Science textbook Curiosity,
                                                               that water exists in three states in nature. As a liquid, it ﬁlls
                                                               the oceans, rivers, and lakes on the Earth. As a solid, it forms
                                                               snow, ice sheets, and glaciers in the mountains and the polar
                                                               regions. As a gas, it exists in the form of water vapour in the
                                                               Earth’s atmosphere. During summers, some of the snow and
                                                               ice gets converted to water due to the Sun’s radiation and ﬂows
                                                               down as rivers, and ultimately into the oceans. The melted ice is
                                                               replenished by fresh snow during winters.
                                                                                                            Water in the oceans,
                                                                                                         rivers, and lakes gets
                                             Sun
                                                                                                         heated due to the Sun, and
                                                                                                         as a result, it evaporates
                                                                                           Precipitation as water vapour. Water
                                                         Condensation
                                                                                                         also evaporates from
                                                                                                         trees and plants through
 Curiosity | Textbook of Science | Grade 7




                                                                                                         transpiration.
                                                   Evaporation               Transpiration                  When water vapour
                                                                                                         rises up, it cools down
                                                                                                         and condenses to form
                                                                                                         clouds. Clouds bring
                                                                                                         rain, snow, and hail.
                                                                                                         This process is called
                                                                 Fig. 7.9: Water cycle                   precipitation.
                                                                  The continuous movement of water — upward as water vapour
                                                              and downward through precipitation, passing through soil, rocks,
                                                              and plants, and ﬁnally returning to water bodies, is called water
                                                              cycle (Fig. 7.9). Thus, the water cycle helps in redistributing and
                                                              replenishing water in rivers, lakes, and oceans. It also serves to
                                                              conserve the total amount of water on the Earth. Rainwater that
                                                              falls on the surface of the Earth, ﬂows into ponds, lakes, rivers,
                                                              and oceans or seeps into the ground.
 98

                                                                                   Reprint 2026-27


Chapter 7.indd 98                                                                                                                     4/3/2025 4:54:04 PM
                                                                                                                            99

                            KNOW A SCIENTIST
                            Varahamihira was an astronomer and mathematician of the




                                                                                                                              Heat Transfer in Nature
                            sixth century CE in Ujjaini (modern-day Ujjain), Madhya Pradesh.
                            In his work Brihatsamhita, he gave methods for predicting seasonal
                            rainfall. His predictions of seasonal rainfalls were based on factors,
                            such as cloud formation, wind patterns, position of stars and the
                            moon, and other natural phenomena.

                       You may have seen people drawing water
                    from wells or handpumps. This is the water that              How does water
                    has seeped into the ground.                                  seep through the
                                                                                 surface of the
                       Let us understand how water seeps through
                                                                                 Earth?
                    the surface of the earth by performing an activity.

                    7.4.1 Seepage of water beneath the
                    Earth
                     Activity 7.5: Let us investigate                                     Clay   Sand   Gravel

                      Take three transparent, used plastic bottles
                       of 1 L capacity.
                      Cut them in the middle and make a small
                       hole in the cap of each bottle.
                      Keep them inverted and put some clay in                   1         2        3
                       one bottle, sand in the second, and gravel Fig. 7.10: An activity to compare the ﬂow of
                       in the third, as shown in Fig. 7.10.             water through clay, sand and gravel
                      Place three identical beakers below each bottle.
                      Add 200 mL of water to each bottle.
                      Predict the amount of water ﬂowing out of each bottle.
                      Collect the water that ﬂows through each bottle for 10 minutes.
                      Compare the amount of water that comes through each
                       bottle.
                     Table 7.5: Seepage of water

                                            Prediction                      Observation
                        Bottles
                       ﬁlled with         Seepage of water             Seepage of water
                                        (very slow/slow/fast)        (very slow/slow/fast)

                    Bottle 1 (Clay)

                    Bottle 2 (Sand)

                    Bottle 3 (Gravel)



                                                          Reprint 2026-27


Chapter 7.indd 99                                                                                                4/3/2025 4:54:05 PM
                                                                                Do your ﬁndings match with your predictions?
                                                                                You may have observed that water seeps fastest through
                                               Open                         gravel, slower through sand, and slowest through clay. Why
                                              spaces
                                                                            is it so? The spaces between gravel particles are wider when
                                                                            compared to those in sand and clay. Hence, water can seep
                                                                            through the gravel more easily. In this way, water seeps
                                                                            beneath the surface of the Earth. This process of surface water
                                                                            seeping through soil and rocks is called inﬁltration. Water
                                                                            can inﬁltrate more readily if the spaces between soil and
                                                                            rock particles are wider, open, and interconnected (Fig. 7.11).
                                                                                The water that seeps through gets stored in the pore spaces
                                             Gravel
                                                                            of sediments and the openings in rocks beneath the surface
                                                                            as groundwater. The underground layers of sediments and
                                                Soil                        rocks that store water in pore spaces are called aquifers
                                                                            (Fig. 7.12). This is the water we extract by digging wells or
                                                                            drilling bore wells into aquifers. This water may be a few
                                                                            metres to hundreds of metres below the ground, depending
                                               Fig. 7.11: Water readily     on the location.
                                              moves, and is stored where
                                              spaces are wide, open and
                                                       connected
                                                                                                             Rain




                                                                                        Well
                                                          Inﬁltration
 Curiosity | Textbook of Science | Grade 7




                                                              Aquifer


                                                                                                      Fig. 7.12: Aquifer
                                                                           However, groundwater is not unlimited. The growing water
                                                                        requirements of an increasing population have led to excessive
                                                                        groundwater extraction. Additionally, decreased vegetation cover
                                                                        and increased concrete surfaces in urban areas have limited
                                                                        water inﬁltration. As a result, groundwater is getting depleted.
                                                                        To address this, rainwater harvesting and recharge pits are used
                                                                        to replenish groundwater. Hence, the water cycle ensures that
                                                                        groundwater sources are recharged, thereby helping to ensure a
                                                                        sustainable groundwater supply.

100

                                                                                               Reprint 2026-27


Chapter 7.indd 100                                                                                                                            4/3/2025 4:54:06 PM
                                                                                                      101
                        Since water scarcity makes life diﬃcult, people have
                     developed diﬀerent ways to conserve water. For example, in
                     Ladakh, people have developed innovative ways to conserve




                                                                                                         Heat Transfer in Nature
                     water by making ice stupas (Fig. 7.13) during the winters.


                       SCIENCE AND SOCIETY
                       Ice Stupa
                       During the spring season in
                       Ladakh, streams often dry
                       up, leading to scarcity of
                       water as the heat from the
                       Sun’s radiation is not enough
                       to melt the snow on the
                       mountains. During winters,
                       water     from      mountain
                       streams is channeled down
                       through underground pipes.
                       This water is then sprayed
                       into the cold air. As it falls, it       Fig. 7.13: Ice stupa
                       freezes due to extremely low
                       temperatures.
                           The ice builds up layer by layer, creating a tall, cone-shaped
                       structure called an ice stupa as shown in Fig. 7.13. The ice stupa
                       melts slowly during spring, providing water for farming and other
                       needs throughout the summer.



                      In a Nutshell

                      There are three ways in which heat is transferred from one
                       place to another — conduction, convection, and radiation.
                      The process of heat transfer from the hotter part of an object
                       to a colder part is called conduction. In this process, particles
                       do not move from their positions.
                      Materials that allow heat to pass through them easily are
                       called good conductors of heat.
                      Materials that do not allow heat to pass through them easily
                       are called poor conductors (insulators) of heat.
                      In solids, heat is mainly transferred through the process of
                       conduction. In liquids and gases, heat is transferred by the
                       process of convection.




                                                        Reprint 2026-27


Chapter 7.indd 101                                                                          4/3/2025 4:54:07 PM
                                                                           In convection, heat transfer takes place by the actual
                                                                            movement of particles. Land and sea breezes are examples
                                                                            of the process of convection.
                                             ENQUIRY                       Heat from the Sun reaches the Earth through radiation.
                                                                           All objects exchange heat with their surroundings through
                                                                            the process of radiation.
                                                                           Processes of conduction and convection require a medium

                                                 ?                          for heat transfer but no medium is required for the radiation
                                                                            process.
                                                                           The principles of heat transfer are utilised in designing
                                              WHY        WHAT IF            houses and clothing.
                                                                           The continuous movement of water — upward as water
                                                 WHERE        W             vapour and downward through precipitation, passing
                                                              H
                                                              E             through soil, rocks and plants, and ﬁnally returning to water
                                                              N             bodies, is called water cycle.
                                             H    WHAT
                                             O
                                             W    COULD                    The process of surface water seeping through soil and rocks
                                             L
                                                              CAN           is called inﬁltration.
                                             O    W       ?    IT
                                             N    H
                                                                           Groundwater is the water that seeps through and gets stored
                                             G    I                         in the pore spaces of sediments and the openings in rocks
                                                  C        WHOSE
                                                  H                         beneath the surface.
                                             WE
                                                     WHAT WILL
                                                                           The underground layers of sediments and rocks that store
                                             HL
                                             AS       HAPPEN                water in pore spaces are called aquifers.
                                             TE
                                              WHY
                                              NOT
                                                          WHAT
                                                         SHOULD               Let Us Enhance Our Learning

                                                                          1. Choose the correct option in each case.
                                                                                (i) Your father bought a saucepan made of two diﬀerent
 Curiosity | Textbook of Science | Grade 7




                                                   B                                materials, A and B, as shown in Fig. 7.14. The materials
                                                                                    A and B have the following properties —
                                                                                   (a) Both A and B are good conductors of heat
                                                    A
                                                                                   (b) Both A and B are poor conductors of heat
                                                        Fig. 7.14: Saucepan        (c) A is a good conductor and B is a poor conductor of
                                                                                        heat
                                                                 Pin Metal         (d) A is a poor conductor and B is a good conductor of
                                                        Stand           strip           heat
                                                                              (ii) Pins are stuck to a metal strip with wax and a burning
                                                                                   candle is kept below the rod, as shown in Fig. 7.15. Which
                                                         IV III II I
                                                                                   of the following will happen?
                                                                    Burning
                                                                     candle        (a) All the pins will fall almost at the same time
                                                                                   (b) Pins I and II will fall earlier than pins III and IV
                                                   Fig. 7.15: Heat                 (c) Pins I and II will fall later than pins III and IV
                                                   transfer set-up                 (d) Pins II and III will fall almost at the same time
102

                                                                                               Reprint 2026-27


Chapter 7.indd 102                                                                                                                              4/3/2025 4:54:08 PM
                                                                                                               103
                       (iii) A smoke detector is a device that detects smoke and
                             sounds an alarm. Suppose you are ﬁtting a smoke
                             detector in your room. The most suitable place for this




                                                                                                                  Heat Transfer in Nature
                             device will be:
                             (a) Near the ﬂoor
                             (b) In the middle of a wall
                             (c) On the ceiling
                             (d) Anywhere in the room
                     2. A shopkeeper serves you cold lassi in a tumbler. By chance,
                        the tumbler had a small leak. You were given another tumbler   INNOVATION
                        by the shopkeeper to put the leaky tumbler in it. Will this
                        arrangement help to keep the lassi cold for a longer time?
                                                                                        DISCOVERY
                        Explain.
                     3. State with reason(s) whether the following statements are
                        True [T] or False [F].                                          ENQUIRY

                          (i) Heat transfer takes place in solids through
                              convection. [ ]                                          EXPLORATION
                         (ii) Heat transfer through convection takes place by the
                              actual movement of particles. [ ]                         CURIOSITY
                       (iii) Areas with clay materials allow more seepage of water
                              than those with sandy materials. [ ]
                        (iv) The movement of cooler air from land to sea is called
                              land breeze. [ ]
                     4. Some ice cubes placed in a dish melt into water after
                         sometime. Where do the ice cubes get heat for this
                         transformation?
                     5. A burning incense stick is ﬁxed, pointing downwards. In
                         which direction would the smoke from the incense stick
                         move? Show the movement of smoke with a diagram.
                     6. Two test tubes with water are heated by a candle ﬂame as
                         shown in Fig. 7.16. Which thermometers (Fig. 7.16a or
                         Fig. 7.16b) will record a higher temperature? Explain.
                                   Thermometer


                                                        Thermometer

                                Water
                                                         Water

                              Burning                                        Burning
                               candle                                         candle

                                    Fig. 7.16(a)                 Fig. 7.16(b)
                              Fig. 7.16: Two thermometers dipped in two test tubes




                                                           Reprint 2026-27


Chapter 7.indd 103                                                                                   4/3/2025 4:54:08 PM
                                                                                7. Why are hollow bricks used to construct the outer walls of
                                                                                   houses in hot regions?
                                                                                8. Explain how large water bodies prevent extreme temperature
                                                                                   in areas around them.
                                                                                9. Explain how water seeps through the surface of the Earth
                                                                                   and gets stored as groundwater.
                                                                               10. The water cycle helps in the redistribution and replenishment
                                                                                   of water on the Earth. Justify the statement.

                                                                                Exploratory Projects

                                                                                Society: Visit a site of water harvesting or a recharge pit.
                                                                                 Find out from people how they are constructed and how
                                                          Disciplinary




                                                                                 they work. Prepare a report with illustrations.
                                                                                Activity: Tightly wrap a thin paper strip around a metallic
                                                                                 rod. Try to burn the paper with a candle while rotating
                                                                                 the rod continuously. Does the paper burn? Explain your
                                                                                 observations.
                                                History              Art
                                                                                Activity: Take a sheet of paper. Draw a spiral on it, as shown in
                                                                                 Fig. 7.17a. Cut the paper along the spiral. Suspend the paper
                                                                                 as shown in the Fig. 7.17b above a burning candle. Observe
                                             Geography               Society     what happens. Provide an explanation for your observation.



                                             Technology              Economy
 Curiosity | Textbook of Science | Grade 7




                                                          Inter




                                                                                        Fig. 7.17(a): Cutting paper   Fig. 7.17(b): Spiral paper
                                                                                                  in spiral           above a burning candle




104

                                                                                                    Reprint 2026-27


Chapter 7.indd 104                                                                                                                                   4/3/2025 4:54:09 PM
