                                  The World of Metals
                        4           and Non-metals
                    Yashwant and Anandi live in a village in Rajasthan. Their school
                    has assigned them a project to learn about craftspersons who
                    work with metals. They decide to visit the local ironsmiths who
                    practise this craft. Yashwant and Anandi request their grandfather
                    to accompany them (Fig. 4.1). They are curious to learn how these
                    ironsmiths make diﬀerent items of daily use. They interact with
                    an elderly craftsperson, Sudarshan uncle.
                    Yashwant: Which items do you generally make?
                    Sudarshan: Generally, we make items of daily use, such as ﬂat
                    pans (tawas), buckets (baltis), tongs (chimtas), and farming tools
                    like spades (phawras), axes (kulhadis), trowels (khurpis), and
                    rakes (jelees).
                    Anandi: What materials are they made of?




                                                                         Fig. 4.1: Ironsmith making various items



                                                       Reprint 2026-27


Chapter 4.indd 41                                                                                                   4/3/2025 4:52:08 PM
                                                        Sudarshan: We use iron metal to make these items. We also use
                                                        wood to prepare handles wherever required. Additionally, we
                                                        use coal in our furnaces to heat the iron.
                                                        Sudarshan is heating an iron block in the furnace. It has become
                                                        red hot. He starts beating it hard with a hammer.
                                                        Anandi is amazed and asks, “Why are you beating it?”
                                                        Sudarshan: I am beating it to shape it into an axe.
                                                        Anandi: Wow, a piece of iron can be beaten into a ﬂat shape! Can
                                                        we do this with other metals as well?
                                                        You may also have many such questions — let us explore what
                                                        else we can do with metals.

                                                           4.1 Properties of Materials

                                                           4.1.1 Malleability

                                                           Activity 4.1: Let us explore

                                                        Caution — Conduct this activity under the supervision of your teacher
                                                        or an adult.
                                                           Collect some waste pieces of copper and aluminium, an iron
                                                            nail, a piece of coal, a pea-sized lump of sulfur (gandhak),
                                                            and a block of wood.
                                                           Recall the chapter ‘Materials Around Us’ in the Grade 6
                                                            Science textbook Curiosity and observe the appearances of
                                                            the above items. Are they lustrous? Also, note whether they
                                                            are hard or soft and record your observations in Table 4.1.
 Curiosity | Textbook of Science | Grade 7




                                                                                                    Now, place each of these
                                                                                                     items one by one on any
                                                                                                     hard surface and beat them
                                                                                                     with a hammer (Fig. 4.2).
                                                                                                    What do you think will
                                                                                                     happen? Do the objects
                                                                                                     become slightly ﬂattened or
                                                                                                     do they break into pieces?
                                                                                                    Record your observations in
                                                                                                     Table 4.1.


                                             Fig. 4.2: Beating an iron nail with a hammer




 42

                                                                                 Reprint 2026-27


Chapter 4.indd 42                                                                                                                  4/3/2025 4:52:08 PM
                                                                                                                       43

                     Table 4.1: Appearance, hardness, and effect of hammering on different
                                objects or materials




                                                                                                                         The World of Metals and Non-metals
                                                  Appearance                     Effect of hammering
                    S.No.    Object/Material       (lustrous/        Hard/Soft   (flattens/breaks into
                                                 non-lustrous)                          pieces)

                      1.    Piece of copper

                      2.    Piece of aluminium

                      3.    Iron nail

                      4.    Piece of coal

                      5.    Lump of sulfur
                            (pea-sized)

                      6.    Block of wood

                        Analyse Table 4.1. Identify the objects that are lustrous in
                    appearance and hard. You might have observed that objects made
                    from copper, aluminium, and iron are lustrous in appearance
                    and are hard. Lustre shown by metals is known as metallic
                    lustre. Materials like copper, aluminium, and iron are known as
                    metals, whereas, coal, sulfur, and wood are non-lustrous and
                    not as hard as metals.
                        Are all metals hard and solid? Not really; some metals like
                    sodium and potassium are so soft that they can be cut with a
                    knife. There is one metal, mercury, that is found in a liquid state at
                    room temperature, which you might have seen in thermometers.
                    Recall the chapter ‘Temperature and its Measurement’ from the
                    Grade 6 Science textbook Curiosity.
                        Which objects did you find become flat on beating with a
                    hammer?
                        You must have observed that objects such as a piece of copper,
                    an iron nail, and a piece of aluminium become flat when beaten;
                    whereas other objects or materials behave differently. This
                    property by which materials can be beaten into thin sheets is
                    called malleability. Most metals possess this property. Can you
                    give some examples of metal sheets? You might have seen thin
                    silver foil on some sweets and aluminium foil used for wrapping
                    food items. These are formed due to their malleability. Gold and
                    silver are the most malleable metals.




                                                         Reprint 2026-27


Chapter 4.indd 43                                                                                        09-09-2025 11.49.54 AM
                                                                A piece of coal or a lump of sulfur does not show this behaviour.
                                                             They break into pieces and are said to be brittle. On the other
                                                             hand, wood neither gets ﬂattened into a sheet nor breaks into
                                                             pieces. Therefore, wood is neither malleable nor brittle.


                                                          HOLISTIC LENS
                                                          The impact of iron on the progress of civilisation of India
                                                          In the Grade 6 Social Science textbook Exploring Society India and
                                                          Beyond, you learnt about the Harappans. They knew how to use
                                                          metals like copper and gold. They used these metals to make various
                                                          objects, from utensils to jewellery. However, you would hardly ﬁnd
                                                          any evidence of the Harappans using a very prominent metal iron,
                                                          which you see a lot around you today. This is because it took a long
                                                          time before iron was used in day-to-day activities.
                                                              However, once the use of iron gained prominence in the times that
                                                          followed, it contributed signiﬁcantly to the progress of civilisation in
                                                          India. For instance, due to its strength, agricultural tools like ploughs
                                                          made from iron were much superior to those used previously.
                                                              What could be the potential reason that it is generally considered
                                                          that copper was discovered earlier as compared to iron?



                                                             4.1.2 Ductility
                                                             Where do you ﬁnd the use of metal wires?
                                                                You might have seen wires of metals like copper or aluminium
                                                             in electrical ﬁttings. Some ornaments, like bangles, necklaces,
                                                             earrings, etc., are also made from metal wires. Metal wires play
                                                             important functions in a variety of stringed musical instruments,
 Curiosity | Textbook of Science | Grade 7




                                                             such as veena, sitar, violin, and guitar.
                                                                This property of materials by which they can be drawn into
                                                             wires is called ductility.
                                                                This property of ductility is mainly possessed by metals.

                                             Gold is so ductile                                       The ductile nature     of
                                             that one gram of it                                      metals enables for
                                             can be drawn into a                                      the creation of
                                             2 kilometre-long wire!                                   this tea strainer
                                                                                                      with metal wire.




 44

                                                                                    Reprint 2026-27


Chapter 4.indd 44                                                                                                                     4/3/2025 4:52:11 PM
                                                                                                       45
                       Have you ever seen wires made of coal or sulfur? Obviously
                    not! We can say that coal and sulfur are not ductile.




                                                                                                         The World of Metals and Non-metals
                       Do you know that ropes made of steel [a mixture
                       of metal (iron) and non-metal (carbon)] wires can          DIVE
                                                                                   EEPER
                       support heavy loads? Therefore, they are used in
                       suspension bridges and in cranes to lift heavy objects.




                                                          Suspension bridge



                    4.1.3 Sonority
                    Have you ever noticed the sound produced when a metal spoon,
                    or a metal plate, or a metal coin is dropped on the ﬂoor? How is it
                    diﬀerent from the sound produced when a piece of coal or wood
                    is dropped on the ﬂoor?
                                                                   I use the diﬀerence in
                      Activity 4.2: Let us investigate             sound when my stick
                                                                   hits wood or metal to
                    Caution — Be careful while dropping the        help ﬁnd my way.
                    objects.
                      Take a few objects, such as a metal
                       spoon, a coin, a piece of coal, and
                       a block of wood.
                      Drop them one by one from a certain height.
                      Do you notice any diﬀerence in the sound
                       produced by these objects?




                                                          Reprint 2026-27


Chapter 4.indd 45                                                                           4/3/2025 4:52:13 PM
                                                             You would observe that the metal spoon and the metal coin
                                                          produce a ringing sound. Coal and wood, on the other hand,
                                                          produce dull sounds.
                                                             This property of metals that enables them to produce a ringing
                                                          sound is called sonority, and metals are said to be sonorous in
                                                          nature.



                                                            Oh! The ringing sound                     Now, I understand!
                                                              of my ghungroos                         The ringing sound
                                                              is also due to the                      of the school bell is
                                                             sonority of metals.                      due to the sonority
                                                                                                           of metals.



                                                          4.1.4 Conduction of heat
                                                          Have you ever observed the vessels used for cooking in the
                                                          kitchen? You might have noticed that the vessels used for heating
                                                          are made of metals. Can you name some metals that are used for
                                                          making cooking vessels? Do you know why these metals are used
                                                          for this purpose?
                                                          Let us ﬁnd out!

                                                             Activity 4.3: Let us investigate

                                                          Caution — This activity must be performed under the supervision of
                                                          your teacher or an adult. Be careful while handling hot water.
                                                                                           Place a glass tumbler on a table.
 Curiosity | Textbook of Science | Grade 7




                                             Metal
                                             spoon                          Wooden         Fill it with hot water.
                                                                             spoon
                                                                                           Take a metal spoon and a wooden
                                                                                            spoon of almost the same size and
                                                                                            thickness.
                                                                                           Immerse        both     the    spoons
                                                                                            simultaneously into the hot water
                                                                                            (Fig. 4.3) and leave them undisturbed
                                                                                            for a few minutes.
                                                Fig. 4.3: Metal and wooden spoons          Now, carefully touch the upper end
                                                       immersed in hot water                of each spoon.




 46

                                                                                    Reprint 2026-27


Chapter 4.indd 46                                                                                                                   4/3/2025 4:52:14 PM
                                                                                                       47
                    Some discussion points:
                      Which of the spoons get hotter?




                                                                                                         The World of Metals and Non-metals
                      What does this experiment tell us about heat transfer along
                       the two spoons?
                        You may have noticed that the metal spoon is hotter to touch
                    than the wooden spoon. Even though both spoons are immersed
                    in the water of the same temperature and for the same time. This
                    shows that the heat transfers through the metal spoon, making it
                    hotter. In contrast, the wooden spoon transfers heat poorly.
                        In such cases, the transfer of heat from one point to another
                    of a material is called conduction, and materials that transfer
                    heat are called conductors.
                        Based on the observations, one can say that metals are good
                    conductors of heat, whereas wood is a poor conductor of heat.
                    Now, we can understand why mostly metal vessels are used
                    for cooking, and their handles are made with wood or other
                    materials that do not conduct heat. You will learn more about
                    this in the chapter ‘Heat Transfer in Nature’.

                    4.1.5 Conduction of electricity
                    Have you ever seen an electrician using a screwdriver? What
                    type of material is used for making its handle? You may have
                    also noticed the electrician wearing rubber gloves and shoes
                    while working. What can be the reason for this?


                     Activity 4.4: Let us design and create

                    Design an electric circuit, like the ‘tester’ circuit in the chapter
                    ‘Electricity: Circuits and their Components’. Repeat the same
                    activity using the materials listed below and record your
                    observations in Table 4.2.
                      You may collect a few objects, such as a piece of aluminium
                         foil, an iron nail, a lump of sulfur (pea-sized), a copper wire,
                         a piece of coal, a piece of dry wood, a stone, an eraser made
                         of rubber and a piece of nylon rope.
                      Predict which of these could make the bulb of the tester
                       glow and which could not.




                                                        Reprint 2026-27


Chapter 4.indd 47                                                                           4/3/2025 4:52:14 PM
                                             Table 4.2: Conduction of electricity by different objects or materials

                                                                              Observation         Good conductor of
                                             S.No.      Object/Material     (bulb glows/does      electricity or poor
                                                                               not glow)        conductor of electricity

                                              1.      Piece of
                                                      aluminium foil

                                              2.      Iron nail
                                                      Lump of sulfur
                                              3.      (pea-sized)

                                              4.      …

                                                        You might have observed that objects made of aluminium,
                                                     iron, and copper make the bulb glow, whereas sulfur, coal,
                                                     wood, stone, eraser, and nylon rope could not make it glow. Do
                                                     you see any pattern in the glowing of bulbs when using different
                                                     materials in Activity 4.4? It is observed that all the materials that
                                                     make the bulb glow are metals.
                                                        Materials that allow electricity to flow through them easily
                                                     are called good conductors of electricity. In contrast, materials
                                                     that prevent the bulb from glowing by not allowing electricity to
                                                     pass through them are called poor conductors of electricity.
                                                        So, now we can understand that the plastic covering on
                                                     screwdrivers and rubber gloves protect the electrician from
                                                     electric shock because these materials are poor conductors of
                                                     electricity.
 Curiosity | Textbook of Science | Grade 7




                                                        We learnt that metals are generally hard, lustrous, malleable,
                                                     ductile, and good conductors of heat and electricity. Now, let us
                                                     learn how metals behave in the presence of air and water.

                                                     4.2 Effect of Air and Water on Metals: Iron
                                                     You would have often noticed that iron objects develop brown
                                                     deposits when left in the open for a few days. In which conditions
                                                     would an iron object develop brown deposits?
                                                       When it comes into contact with dry air only.
                                                       When it comes into contact with water only.
                                                       When it comes into contact with both air and water.




 48

                                                                          Reprint 2026-27


Chapter 4.indd 48                                                                                                          09-09-2025 11.50.56 AM
                                                                                                                            49

                      Activity 4.5: Let us experiment




                                                                                                                              The World of Metals and Non-metals
                    Caution — Be careful while handling iron nails.
                      Take a few shining iron nails. If you are using old iron
                       nails, make sure to remove brown deposits from their
                       surface by scrubbing them with the help of a small                                Thread
                                                                                            A
                       piece of sandpaper.
                      Take three clean, dry glass bottles or test tubes with                            Iron nail
                       tight-ﬁtting caps or stoppers. Label them A, B, and C.
                                                                                                         Silica gel
                      Take three iron nails and tie each iron nail with a thread.      Fig. 4.4(a)
                      Place one iron nail and some silica gel in the glass bottle
                       ‘A’, and tighten the cap or stopper (Fig. 4.4a). Silica gel
                       makes the air dry. It is the substance that is used in
                                                                                            B            Thread
                       small pouches in some medicine bottles, water bottles,
                       shoe boxes, etc., to keep them dry.                                               Oil

                      Place one iron nail in the glass bottle ‘B’. Pour freshly                         Iron nail
                       boiled and cooled water (to remove dissolved gases)                               Water
                       into it until the iron nail is completely dipped in it. Now,     Fig. 4.4(b)
                       pour some oil to form a layer over the surface of the
                       water (Fig. 4.4b). The layer of oil on the surface of the
                       water prevents the air from dissolving in the water. Cap
                                                                                             C          Thread
                       the glass bottle tightly.
                      Place one iron nail in the glass bottle ‘C’, and pour some
                       water so that the iron nail is partially dipped. Keep this                        Iron nail
                       glass bottle unstoppered. This allows the iron nail to                            Water
                       come into contact with both water and air, as shown in           Fig. 4.4(c)
                       Fig. 4.4c.
                                                                                      Fig. 4.4: Glass bottles
                      Place all the glass bottles undisturbed at room                containing iron nails
                       temperature and observe the changes for 8 – 10 days.
                      Record your observations in Table 4.3.

                     Table 4.3: Formation of brown deposit on iron nails

                                              Conditions
                    Glass
                    Bottle                                                      Observations
                              Presence of water         Presence of air
                                  (Yes/No)                 (Yes/No)

                      A               No                         Yes

                      B

                      C




                                                         Reprint 2026-27


Chapter 4.indd 49                                                                                                4/3/2025 4:52:14 PM
                                                       What can you conclude from this experiment?
                                                          It is observed in glass bottles A and B that the iron nails do not
                                                       show any brown deposits. What does this observation indicate?
                                                       This indicates that brown deposits or discolouration on the iron
                                                       nails do not develop when the iron nail is kept in dry air alone
                                                       (bottle A) or water alone (bottle B). However, in glass bottle C, the
                                                       iron nail shows the presence of brown deposits. This indicates that
                                                       the presence of both water and air is essential for these deposits
                                                       to develop. Thus, moist air is responsible for the development of
                                                       brown deposits on objects made of iron. This brown deposit is
                                                       called rust. The process of formation of rust on objects made of
                                                       iron is called rusting.
                                                          Many other metals also exhibit discolouration when kept open
                                                       in the atmosphere. Have you noticed the formation of a green
                                                       coating on the surface of copper objects or a black coating on the
                                                       surface of silver objects? Gradual deterioration of metal surfaces
                                                       caused by air, water, or other substances is known as corrosion.
                                                          Do you know that rusting of iron is a serious problem in our
                                                       country? Every year, an enormous amount of money is spent to
                                                       replace or repair iron structures damaged due to rusting.
                                                          The rusting of iron can be prevented by several methods such
                                                       as painting, oiling, greasing, and applying a protective layer of
                                                       zinc metal on iron (galvanisation). We will learn about this in
                                                       higher grades.



                                                          FASCINATING FACTS
                                                          The wonder of ancient Indian metallurgy!
 Curiosity | Textbook of Science | Grade 7




                                                          The Iron Pillar of Delhi was made in the time of
                                                          Chandragupta II more than 1600 years ago. It is about
                                                          8 metres high and weighs more than 6000 kilograms.
                                                          What is interesting about this iron pillar is that despite
                                                          all these years of facing winds, rainfall, and intense
                                                          weather, it has barely any rust.
                                                                             In other words, it has been made in
                                                                          a way that it resists rusting. This tells us
                                                                          about the skills that were developed in
                                                                          metal technology in India.


                                             The Iron Pillar (Delhi)




 50

                                                                             Reprint 2026-27


Chapter 4.indd 50                                                                                                              4/3/2025 4:52:15 PM
                                                                                                                                51

                     4.3 Eﬀect of Air and Water on Other
                         Metals




                                                                                                                                  The World of Metals and Non-metals
                      Activity 4.6: Let us investigate (demonstration activity)

                    The teacher may demonstrate this activity.
                    Caution — It is advisable for students to wear protective eyeglasses
                    and keep safe distance.
                      Take a magnesium ribbon about
                       3 – 4 centimetres long. Clean
                       it by rubbing with a piece of
                       sandpaper.
                      Hold it with a pair of tongs.
                       Ignite the other end using a
                       spirit lamp or a candle (Fig. 4.5).
                      Let the magnesium ribbon burn.
                      What do you observe?
                                                                    Fig. 4.5: Burning magnesium ribbon
                      You must have observed that
                       magnesium ribbon burns with a dazzling white ﬂame and
                       changes into a white powder. Collect it on a watch glass. This
                       powder is magnesium oxide. It is formed due to the reaction
                       between magnesium and oxygen present in the air.
                      Add a few drops of warm water to this white powder, stir it
                       well, and check its nature.
                      Recall the chapter ‘Exploring Substances: Acidic, Basic, and
                       Neutral’. Find out whether the solution of magnesium oxide
                       is acidic or basic or neutral in nature. You can use any
                       acid-base indicator.
                                                                                                    Blue litmus
                      What eﬀect does this solution have                                              paper
                       on blue and red litmus papers?
                                                                                                            Red litmus
                       You would observe that it changes                                                      paper
                    the colour of red litmus paper to blue
                    (Fig. 4.6); hence, it is basic in nature.
                    Generally, oxides of metals are basic in
                    nature.                                                                                  Watch
                                                                                                             glass
                       We will discuss this burning of
                    magnesium ribbon further in the
                    chapter ‘Changes Around Us: Physical                  Fig. 4.6: Testing the nature of
                    and Chemical’.                                               magnesium oxide




                                                        Reprint 2026-27


Chapter 4.indd 51                                                                                                    4/3/2025 4:52:16 PM
                                                                       Do you know that sodium is a metal which is stored in kerosene
                                                                   because it reacts vigorously with oxygen and water. A lot of heat
                                                                   is generated in the reaction. Storing sodium in kerosene prevents
                                                                   its exposure to moisture and air. Can you predict the nature of
                                                                   its oxide?
                                                                       Let us now discuss some substances that do not behave like
                                                                   metals.

                                                                     4.4 Substances that Behave Diﬀerently
                                                                         from Metals in Air and Water

                                                                      Activity 4.7: Let us experiment (demonstration activity)

                                                                               The teacher may demonstrate this activity.
                                                                               Caution — This activity must be performed in a fume hood
                                                                               or well-ventilated area. Burning sulfur produces gases, which
                                                                               can be harmful if inhaled.
                                                 Fig. 4.7(a): Deﬂagrating
                                                           spoon
                                                                                 Take a small amount of powdered sulfur in a
                                                                                  deﬂagrating spoon (it is a long-handled metal
                                                                                  spoon used in experiments to safely heat and burn
                                                                                  substances Fig. 4.7a). If a deﬂagrating spoon is not
                                                                                  available, you may take a metallic cap of any bottle,
                                                                                  wrap a metallic wire around it and give it the shape
                                                                                  as shown in Fig. 4.7b.
                                                                                 Heat it on a ﬂame, and as soon as the sulfur starts
                                                                                  burning, introduce the deﬂagrating spoon into a
                                                  Fig. 4.7(b): Improvised
                                                                                  gas jar or glass tumbler (Fig. 4.7c). Cover the gas jar
 Curiosity | Textbook of Science | Grade 7




                                                    deﬂagrating spoon
                                                                                  or glass tumbler with a lid to ensure that the gas
                                                                                  produced does not escape.
                                                                                 Remove the lid after 3 – 4 minutes and take out the
                                                                                  deﬂagrating spoon. Add a small quantity of water
                                                                                  into the gas jar, quickly place the lid back and shake
                                                                                  it so that the gas dissolves.
                                                                                Again, recall the chapter ‘Exploring Substances:
                                                                                 Acidic, Basic, and Neutral’. Using an acid-base
                                                                       Gas jar   indicator, check whether the solution obtained
                                                                                 after the addition of water to the gas jar is acidic or
                                             Sulfur                              basic or neutral.
                                                                                 What do you observe?
                                              Fig. 4.7(c): Burning of sulfur


 52

                                                                                           Reprint 2026-27


Chapter 4.indd 52                                                                                                                              4/3/2025 4:52:17 PM
                                                                                                                                53
                                                                                                       Blue litmus
                        You would observe that it is acidic in                                            paper
                    nature (Fig. 4.7d).
                                                                                                            Red litmus
                        On burning sulfur in air (oxygen),




                                                                                                                                  The World of Metals and Non-metals
                                                                                                              paper
                    sulfur dioxide gas is formed. On dissolving
                    sulfur dioxide gas in water, sulfurous acid
                    is formed.                                                                             Watch glass
                        Does sulfur behave in water the same
                    way metals do?
                                                                           Fig. 4.7(d): Testing of solution with
                      Activity 4.8: Let us explore                                     litmus papers

                      Take some sulfur powder in a glass tumbler.
                      Add a small amount of water to it.
                      What do you observe?
                        You may have noticed that there is no reaction when sulfur is
                    placed in water.
                        Substances like sulfur and phosphorus behave diﬀerently
                    with air and water than metals. Phosphorus is stored in water
                    as it catches ﬁre when exposed to atmospheric air. These
                    substances are usually soft and dull in appearance. They are
                    neither malleable nor ductile, and they are not sonorous. They
                    are also poor conductors of heat and electricity. These are called
                    non-metals. Their oxides are acidic in nature.
                        Some other non-metals are oxygen, hydrogen, nitrogen, carbon,
                    etc. These must not be confused with materials such as plastic,
                    glass, wood, rubber, and paper. These materials are not classiﬁed
                    as metals or non-metals because they are not elements.


                                                                                DIVE
                     Metals and non-metals are sub-categories of
                     substances called elements. An element is a substance       EEPER
                     that cannot be broken down into simpler substances.
                         Presently 118 elements are known. These
                     elements are the basic building blocks of all matter.
                     Some are naturally occurring, while others are
                     artiﬁcially made in the laboratory, and do not exist
                     in nature. You will study more about elements in
                     higher grades.

                     4.5 Are Non-metals Essential in
                         Everyday Life?
                    You often observe many metals in your day-to-day lives because
                    of their distinct properties, such as their lustrous nature, heat




                                                         Reprint 2026-27


Chapter 4.indd 53                                                                                                    4/3/2025 4:52:18 PM
                                                and electrical conductivity, and high strength. However, this
                                                should not give an impression in your mind that non-metals are
                                                not important in our lives.
                                                    We breathe in oxygen, which is a non-metal, and without it,
                                                we would not be able to survive. Can you think of any other uses
                                                of oxygen?
                                                    Carbon is essential in everyday life because it is the building
                                                block of all life forms. It is a key component of proteins, fats, and
                                                carbohydrates, which are necessary for growth and energy.
                                                    Nitrogen is used in the manufacturing of fertilisers and other
                                                chemicals. It is an essential nutrient for the growth of plants.
                                                Chlorine is a non-metal commonly used in water puriﬁcation.
                                                A solution of iodine, a non-metal, is applied on wounds as an
                                                antiseptic.

                                             SCIENCE AND SOCIETY
                                             Do you know that many metals and their alloys (mixtures of two or
                                             more metals or a metal and a non-metal) are important for daily use as
                                             utensils and tools. These are also important for modern technologies
                                             and essential in almost every industry. Some special metals are also
                                             used in atomic energy (such as zirconium), aerospace (titanium), etc.
                                             In India, many metals, especially iron and aluminium, are recycled to
                                             minimise waste and contribute to sustainability.


                                                  In a Nutshell

                                                  Metals and non-metals are diﬀerentiated based on their
                                                   properties.
 Curiosity | Textbook of Science | Grade 7




                                                  Generally, metals are lustrous, whereas most non-metals are
                                                   non-lustrous.
                                                  Metals are generally malleable and ductile, while non-metals
                                                   do not have these properties.
                                                  Metals are good conductors of heat and electricity, but
                                                   non-metals are generally poor conductors.
                                                  Metals react with oxygen to produce metal oxides which are
                                                   basic in nature.
                                                  Non-metals react with oxygen to produce oxides which are
                                                   acidic in nature.
                                                  Generally, non-metals do not react with water.
                                                  Metal objects get damaged when exposed to moist air, and
                                                   the process is known as corrosion.
                                                  Metals and non-metals have wide applications in
                                                   everyday life.
 54

                                                                     Reprint 2026-27


Chapter 4.indd 54                                                                                                       4/3/2025 4:52:19 PM
                                                                                                                                  55
                    Let Us Enhance Our Learning

                    1. Which metal is commonly used to make food packaging




                                                                                                                                    The World of Metals and Non-metals
                       materials as it is cheaper, and its thin sheets can be
                       folded easily into any shape?
                                                                                                           ENQUIRY
                        (i) Aluminium        (ii) Copper
                      (iii) Iron            (iv) Gold
                    2. Which of the following metal catches ﬁre when it comes
                       in contact with water?
                        (i) Copper
                      (iii) Zinc
                                             (ii) Aluminium
                                            (iv) Sodium
                                                                                                             ?
                    3. State with reason(s) whether the following statements                     WHAT IF     WHY
                       are True [T] or False [F].
                                                                                                  W        WHERE
                         (i) Aluminium and copper are examples of non-metals                      H
                                                                                                  E
                             used for making utensils and statues. [ ]                            N
                                                                                                         WHAT      H
                        (ii) Metals form oxides when combined with oxygen,                               COULD
                                                                                                                   O
                                                                                                                   W
                             the solution of which turns blue litmus paper to                    CAN
                                                                                                                   L
                             red. [ ]                                                             IT   ?    W      O
                                                                                                            H      N
                      (iii) Oxygen is a non-metal essential for respiration. [ ]                            I      G
                                                                                                 WHOSE      C
                       (iv) Copper vessels are used for boiling water because                               H
                             they are good conductors of electricity. [ ]                                        WE
                                                                                                 WHAT WILL       H L
                    4. Why are only a few metals suitable for making                              HAPPEN         A S
                                                                                                                 T E
                        jewellery?
                                                                                                   WHAT      WHY
                    5. Match the uses of metals and non-metals given in                           SHOULD     NOT
                        Column I with the jumbled names of metals and
                        non-metals given in Column II.

                                       Column I                                  Column II

                    (i) Used in electrical wiring                          (a) E N X Y G O

                    (ii) Most malleable and ductile                        (b) N E C O H I R L

                    (iii) Living organisms cannot survive without it.      (c) P E P O R C

                    (iv) Plants grow healthy when fertilisers              (d) T E N G O I N R
                         containing it are added to the soil.

                    (v) Used in water puriﬁcation                          (e) O G D L

                    6. What happens when oxygen reacts with magnesium
                       and sulfur. What are the main diﬀerences in the nature
                       of products formed?




                                                         Reprint 2026-27


Chapter 4.indd 55                                                                                                      4/3/2025 4:52:19 PM
                                                                                 7. Complete the following ﬂow chart:
                                                                                        ?            Air            Heat                Ash
                                                                                                                                                Water
                                                    INNOVATION
                                                                                                                                            ?

                                                     DISCOVERY
                                                                                                                              Add blue and red litmus
                                                                                                                                solutions separately
                                                     ENQUIRY


                                                                                                                     Change in blue                  Change in red
                                                    EXPLORATION                                                      litmus solution                litmus solution


                                                     CURIOSITY                                                                ?                          Blue

                                                                                 8. You are provided with the following materials. Discuss which
                                                                                    material would be your choice to make a pan that is most
                                                                                    suitable for boiling water and why?

                                                                                 Iron       copper         sulfur      coal       plastic        wood     cardboard

                                                                                 9. You are provided with three iron nails, each dipped in oil,
                                                                                    water and vinegar. Which iron nail will not rust, and why?
                                                                                10. How do the diﬀerent properties of metals and non-metals
                                                                                    determine their uses in everyday life?
                                                                                11. One of the methods of protecting iron from getting rusted is
                                                                                    to put a thin coating of zinc metal over it. Since sulfur does
                                                                                    not react with water, can it be used for this purpose? Justify
                                                          Disciplinary




                                                                                    your answer.
                                                                                12. An ironsmith heats iron before making tools. Why is heating
 Curiosity | Textbook of Science | Grade 7




                                                                                    necessary in this process?

                                                                                 Exploratory Projects
                                                History                  Art

                                                                                  Dhokra, Bidriware, Pembarthi, and Kamrupi are some of
                                                                                   India’s famous metal art styles. Find out the states where
                                                                         Society
                                                                                   these artworks are made. Also, make a collage of their
                                             Geography
                                                                                   photographs.
                                                                                  On a map of India, mark the states where iron, gold,
                                                                                   aluminium and other metals are found.
                                             Technology                  Economy  Explore the metals and non-metals found in smartphones
                                                                                   and ﬁnd out how they help the phone work properly.
                                                                                  Organise a classroom debate on whether the use of metals
                                                          Inter




                                                                                   for comfort and luxury should be increased or decreased.


 56

                                                                                                            Reprint 2026-27


Chapter 4.indd 56                                                                                                                                                     4/3/2025 4:52:20 PM
