                                                                                                                  6



                                                                                                        CHAPTER
                     The Age of
                     Reorganisation

                           By continuous living tradition and a vital power of
                           rejuvenescence, this land has readjusted itself through
                           unnumbered transformations.
                           			                         — Jagdish Chandra Bose (1917)

                                      Fig. 6.1.1. A glimpse of the art from the age of reorganisation




                                                  1.   Why is the period that
                     The   Big                         followed the Maurya empire
                       Questions                       sometimes called the ‘Age of
                                                       Reorganisation’?
                                                                                                                  6 – The Age of Reorganisation




                                                  2.   What were the values or
                                                       principles that guided
                                                                                                                  Tapestry of the Past




                                                       emperors of that period?
                                                  3.   How did foreign invaders
                                                       assimilate into Indian society
                                                       and contribute to cultural
                                                       confluence?                                                117




                                                            Reprint 2026-27


Chapter 6.indd 117                                                                                                            08-04-2025 11:38:22
                                                                          Bhavisha and Dhruv had recovered from their journey to
                                                                          the Maurya empire and were itching for another adventure.
                                                                          They decide to use Itihāsa again and landed in a new
                                                                          historical period. They came across a collection of art pieces,
                                                                          each one quite different from the other. (See Fig. 6.1.1) They
                                                                          wondered —could these artefacts belong to multiple
                                                                          kingdoms rather than just one? They guessed right. In this
                                                                          chapter we will travel over a fairly long period. Here we go…

                                                                                           Very little is known about Aśhoka’s
                                                                                           successors to the throne. It is generally
                                                                                           accepted, however, that the last
                                                                                           Maurya emperor was assassinated
                                                                                           around 185 BCE by his commander-
                                                                                           in-chief Puṣhyamitra Śhunga. This led
                                                                                           to a breakup of the empire — hardly
                                                                                           half a century after Aśhoka, as we
                                                                                           mentioned in the last chapter. Many
                                                                                           new kingdoms emerged across the
                                                                                           subcontinent, which, often, were
                                                                        Fig. 6.1.2.
                                                                                           earlier tributary kingdoms under the
                                                                      overlordship of the Maurya empire. The northwest region
                                                                      became weak, exposing it to invasions from outside the
                                                                      subcontinent.
                                                                      This period is also known as the ‘age of reorganisation’ by
               Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 1




                                                                      some scholars as the existing regions were being reorganised
                                                                      into new kingdoms that were constantly competing to become
                                                                      powerful. The map of India changed significantly in that age, as
                                                                      did people’s lives.


                                                                      LET’S EXPLORE
                                                                      Create a timeline on a sheet of paper marking the period
                                                                      from the first year of the 2nd century BCE and ending in the
                                                                      last year of the 3rd century CE. How many years does this
                                                                      period cover? As we progress through the chapter, mark the
                                                                      key individuals, kingdoms and events on the timeline.

              118




                                                                                        Reprint 2026-27


Chapter 6.indd 118                                                                                                                          08-04-2025 11:38:23
                               n




                                                           K
                                   do
                             I

                                        -G




                                                             u
                                             re




                                                                ṣ
                                                  ek
                                                       s




                                                                  h
                                                                     ā
                                                                            ṇ
                                                           Śhakas



                                                                              a
                                                                                   s
                                                       (Indo-Scythians)


                                                                                               Śhungas


                                                                                           a   s
                                                                                       a n
                                                                               ā   h
                                                                            av
                                                                                                    is
                                                                        t                          ed
                                                                   Sā
                                                                                                   Ch



                             Arabian                                                                     Bay of
                              Sea                                                                       Bengal
                                                                                        olas
                                                                            Che


                                                                                       s Ch
                                                                            ras

                                                                                   ya
                                                                                  nḍ
                                                                              Pā




                                                                                                                  6 – The Age of Reorganisation




                          Fig. 6.2. Prominent dynasties of India during the age of reorganisation

                       LET’S REMEMBER
                                                                                                                  Tapestry of the Past




                     While working on the timeline, did you notice the transition
                     from BCE to CE? Remember what you learned in the Grade 6
                     chapter ‘Timeline and Sources of History’ about how time
                     is measured in history.
                                                                                                                  119




                                                                     Reprint 2026-27


Chapter 6.indd 119                                                                                                            08-04-2025 11:38:24
                   Matrimonial                                        LET’S EXPLORE
                   alliance : An
             alliance arranged                                        In the previous chapter, you studied the map of the Maurya
                       through a
                       marriage,                                      empire (see page 100). Above is a map of the post-Maurya
                        generally                                     period. How many kingdoms can you count in the area that
                   between two
                                                                      were previously under the control of the Maurya empire?
                    members of
                  royal families.
               In practice, this                                      The ‘new’ kingdoms now competed for territorial control.
                    would often
                    mean a king
                                                                      Peaceful methods like matrimonial alliances between neighbour-
                     offering his                                     ing kingdoms, or the use of force in warfare, were means of
                   daughter for                                       gaining control. Remember that there was constant wrestling
             marriage into the
                 royal family of                                      for control over areas along the borders, as gaining control over
               a neighbouring                                         them was important to keep the kingdom safe from attacks.
                 kingdom, with
                   the intention                                      Together with those political events, there was a burst in the
                   of cementing                                       development of art, architecture and literature, and enriching
                      an alliance
             between the two                                          cultural exchanges. We will get a peek into this in the following
                      kingdoms.                                       sections.




                                                                                   Dynasties from         Dynasties from
                                                                                       within the         outside the
                                                                                    Subcontinent          Subcontinent
                                                                                 Śhungas, Chedis,              Indo-Greeks,
               Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 1




                                                                          Sātavāhanas,                             Śhakas,
                                                                              Cholas,                                    Kuṣhāṇas
                                                                         Cheras,
                                                                       Pānḍyas

                                                                                             Prominent
                                                                                           dynasties of the
                                                                                            Subcontinent




                                                                                                     Fig. 6.3
              120




                                                                                        Reprint 2026-27


Chapter 6.indd 120                                                                                                                        08-04-2025 11:38:25
                     Surge of the Śhungas
                     Puṣhyamitra Śhunga founded the Śhunga dynasty, which
                     ruled over parts of north and central India. He performed
                     the aśhvamedha yajña, a Vedic ritual, to establish himself as a
                     most powerful ruler. Although his empire was smaller than the
                     previous Maurya Empire (compare their two maps), he kept it
                     safe from potential invaders and maintained friendly relations
                     with the Greeks, after some initial military campaign against
                     them. But, again, the empire did not last long after him — a
                     century later, it was gone.
                     The period witnessed the revival of Vedic rituals and practices,
                     but other schools of thought nevertheless continued to flourish.

                        DON’T MISS OUT




                      Fig. 6.4. Scene from the Rāmāyaṇa in which King Rāma is seen performing
                           the aśhvamedha yajña (19th century painting, National Museum)
                                                                                                6 – The Age of Reorganisation




                      The aśhvamedha yajña was a Vedic ritual conducted by
                      many rulers to declare their position as the king. In this
                                                                                                Tapestry of the Past




                      ritual, a horse accompanied by soldiers was left to wander
                      freely. Any territory that the horse crossed unchallenged
                      was considered to become a part of the king’s empire. If
                      any ruler stopped the horse, it led to a battle to determine
                      supremacy.
                                                                                                121




                                                            Reprint 2026-27


Chapter 6.indd 121                                                                                          08-04-2025 11:38:26
                                                                      Sanskrit emerged as one of the preferred languages for
                                                                      philosophical and literary works. Do you recall some aspects
                                                                      of the Yoga Sūtras in your Physical Education and Well-being
                                                                      classes in Grade 6? These Yoga Sūtras were compiled by Patañjali
                                                                      during this period.
                                                                      The Śhungas patronised literature, art and architecture. The
                                                                      Bharhut Stūpa (in present-day Madhya Pradesh) presents us
                                                                      with beautiful examples of Śhunga art. It was probably built
                                                                      during the time of Ashoka, but the Śhungas added beautifully
                                                                      carved railings and reliefs depicting stories from the Buddha’s
                                                                      life. These are considered some of the earliest examples of
                                                                      Buddhist art.




                                                                       1                                                  2
               Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 1




                                                                       3                                                  4

                                                                       Fig.6.5.1. Railings at the Bharhut Stūpa. Fig. 6.5.2. Carving of Lakshmi on a
                                                                      railing. Fig. 6.5.3. A group of singers and dancers. 6.5.4. Elephants holding up
              122                                                                                    the wheel of dharma




                                                                                             Reprint 2026-27


Chapter 6.indd 122                                                                                                                                       08-04-2025 11:38:28
                                           Some Śhunga Contribution to Art




                                      1                     2                              3                    4




                                  5                              6                                7

                                                                                                                    6 – The Age of Reorganisation
                                                                                                                    Tapestry of the Past




                                  8                              9                               10

                      Fig. 6.6.1. Pillar with a Greek warrior. Fig. 6.6.2. Male figure. Fig. 6.6.3. Woman with a
                     child. Fig. 6.6.4. Woman with a fan. Fig. 6.6.5. A vase. Fig. 6.6.6. Female figure with hair
                     ornaments, terracotta. Fig. 6.6.7. Royal family. Fig. 6.6.8. Bronze bangles covered with a
                            thin layer of gold. Fig. 6.6.9. Comb of ivory. Fig. 6.6.10. Beads of a necklace.        123




                                                                 Reprint 2026-27


Chapter 6.indd 123                                                                                                              08-04-2025 11:38:32
                                                                      LET’S EXPLORE
                                                                      Below is a panel from the Bharhut Stūpa. Look at the two
                                                                      figures on the right. What are they doing? Can you guess
                                                                      their profession? Notice their attire. What does this tell us
                                                                      about them? List other details that you notice in the panel
                                                                      and discuss your findings in class.




                                                                                    Fig. 6.7. A panel from the Bharhut Stūpa


                                                                      LET’S EXPLORE
                                                                      Look closely at the pictures in the collage in Fig 6.6 (on the
                                                                      previous page). In a note, write down your observations on
                                                                      the clothes, the jewellery, and other objects of daily use.
               Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 1




                                                                      The Sātavāhanas
                                                                      From the limited evidence available, the Śhungas seem to have
                                                                      waged wars with many of their neighbouring regions. This
                                                                      may have included the Sātavāhanas, who ruled large parts of
                                                                      the Deccan from the 2nd century BCE onward, to the south of
                                                                      the Śhunga Empire. Sometimes referred to as ‘Andhras’, the
                                                                      Sātavāhanas were a powerful dynasty and their empire largely
                                                                      comprised of present-day Andhra Pradesh, Telangana and
                                                                      Maharashtra, with different capital cities at different times — the
                                                                      most famous were Amrāvatī and Pratiṣhṭhāna (Paithan). Trade
                                                                      and commerce appear to have flourished in the Sātavāhana
              124                                                     kingdom.




                                                                                         Reprint 2026-27


Chapter 6.indd 124                                                                                                                          08-04-2025 11:38:33
                     Coins issued by the Sātavāhana rulers
                     have been found in various regions
                     of India, from Gujarat to Andhra
                     Pradesh — India’s western and eastern
                     coasts. Indeed, many coins depicted
                     ships, suggesting that maritime trade
                     was an important part of economic life.
                     The type of ship depicted on the coin
                     above suggests advanced shipbuilding
                     and navigation technologies.
                                                                         Fig. 6.8. A Sātavāhana coin bearing
                     Agriculture flourished in the Krishna-       the image of a seafaring ship with
                                                                 two masts. Notice how the masts of
                     Godavari river system, which provided
                                                                  the ship are prominently depicted
                     economic stability to the kingdom.            with intersecting lines, possibly
                     The Sātavāhanas had active trade             representing  sails; the wavy lines
                                                                   below represent oceanic waters.
                     networks that reached as far as the
                     Roman Empire and included an exchange of goods like spices,
                     textiles, sandalwood, and luxury items like gold-plated pearls,
                     ivory, etc. Imports included glass and perfumed ointments. Tolls
                     and taxes on trade added revenue to the kingdom.
                     Economic prosperity and a relatively peaceful political period
                     facilitated the development of literature, art and culture, to
                     which the Sātavāhanas made significant contributions.




                                                                                                               6 – The Age of Reorganisation
                                                                                                               Tapestry of the Past




                      Fig. 6.9. The Naneghat Caves near Pune, located close to a major trade route, were
                             used for collection of tolls and taxes, and as resting places for traders.        125




                                                              Reprint 2026-27


Chapter 6.indd 125                                                                                                         08-04-2025 11:38:33
                                                                                                                    Life under the Sātavāhanas
                                                                                                                    In the Sātavāhana tradition, princes were
                                                                                                                    often named after their mothers. Thus
                                                                                                                    Gautamīputra Sātakarṇi was named
                                                                                                                    after his mother, Gautamī Balaśhrī. She
                                                                                                                    was a powerful queen who donated
                                                                                                                    land to Buddhist monks and had an
                                                                                                                    important inscription carved in Nāśhik,
                                                                      Fig. 6.10. Coin of the Sātavāhanas with
                                                                      an inscription in Brahmi script, ‘King
                                                                                                                    showing her influence in the kingdom.
                                                                         Lord Sātakarṇi, son of Gautamī’.


                                                                                     THINK ABOUT IT
                                                                                     What, according to you, could the tradition of using the
                                                                                     mother’s name at the beginning of a king’s name signify?

                                                                                     Another set of inscriptions found in the Naneghat caves near
                                                                                     Pune (Fig. 6.9) focuses on a Sātavāhana widow queen who,
                                                                                     remarkably, performed several Vedic rituals, including the
                                                                                     aśhvamedha yajña. The inscriptions mention Vedic gods like
                                                                                     Indra, Chandra, and Sūrya. We also get a glimpse of the queen’s
                                                                                     donations (dāna): land, cows, horses, elephants, silver coins, and
                                                                                     other items to priests, guests, workers, scholars, and monks.
                                                                                     These inscriptions are in the Brahmi script and include a
               Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 1




                                                                                     few numerals (that is, symbols for numbers) which, at times,
                                                                                     resemble today’s shapes, as shown below. This is one of the many
                                                                                     evidences showing that modern numerals ultimately originated
                                                                                     in India.

                                                                                        1      2                4             6     7            9     10




                                                                                     THINK ABOUT IT
                                                                                     In the above series of numerals, which ones look somewhat
                                                                                     like our modern numerals? Which ones don’t?
              126




                                                                                                            Reprint 2026-27


Chapter 6.indd 126                                                                                                                                              08-04-2025 11:38:33
                     The Sātavāhanas were devout followers of Vāsudeva (another
                     name for Kṛiṣhṇa), although they also patronised other schools
                     of thought, which flourished during their rule. For instance,
                     Sātavāhana kings often granted tax-free agricultural land to
                     Vedic scholars, Jaina and Buddhist monks, helping them to
                     pursue their studies and practices.




                 Fig. 6.11. The Karla caves (near Lonavala
                 in present-day Maharashtra) to which the
                Sātavāhanas contributed during their reign.
                These caves were made for Buddhist monks.         Fig. 6.12. A yakṣha (a minor deity
                Notice the magnificent pillars and the stone      associated with nature) from the
                   replica of a stūpa in the centre — all of   Pitalkhora caves, Maharashtra, carved
                       it carved out of a rocky hillside!             in the Sātavāhana period.


                        THINK ABOUT IT
                        This sculpture of a yakṣha from Pitalkhora carries an
                        inscription on its hand, kanhadāsena hiramakarena kāṭa
                                                                                                       6 – The Age of Reorganisation




                        meaning ‘made by Kanahadasa, a goldsmith’. Is it not
                        interesting to see that a goldsmith could also craft a sculpture
                                                                                                       Tapestry of the Past




                        made of stone? What do you think this tells us about people’s
                        professions at the time?

                     In the 3rd century CE, the Sātavāhana Empire fragmented into
                     smaller independent kingdoms. Several factors contributed to
                     its disintegration, the most significant one being weak central
                                                                                                       127




                                                           Reprint 2026-27


Chapter 6.indd 127                                                                                                 08-04-2025 11:38:33
                                                                                control and a gradual economic decline. Once again, this will
                                                                                pave the way for regional powers to assert or reassert their
                                                                                dominance and establish new kingdoms.


                                                                                Coming of the Chedis
                                                                                Let us go back a little. Do you remember the Kalinga war
                                                                                mentioned in the previous chapter? After the decline of the
                                                                                Maurya Empire, Kalinga rose as a prominent power under the
                                                                                kings of the Chedi dynasty.
                                                                                Khāravela, one of their main rulers, was a devoted follower
                                                                                of Jain teachings; he was sometimes called bhikṣhu-rāja or
                                                                                monk-king, although he respected all schools of thoughts. Near
                                                                                Bhubaneswar, the famous Udayagiri-Khandagiri caves, likely
                                                                                developed for Jain monks, feature intricate panels and statues,
                                                                                and spacious rooms carved into the rock, showcasing the skill
                                                                                of the craftsmen. The design and craftsmanship of these caves
                                                                                make them notable examples of ‘rock-cut architecture’, a style of
                                                                                architecture that we will turn to in higher classes.

                                                                      1
               Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 1




                                                                      2                                              3




                                                                          Fig. 6.13.1. Udayagiri caves near Bhubaneswar. Fig. 6.13.2. The Hāthīgumphā
              128                                                          inscription. Fig. 6.13.3. Carved panel showing a scene from the Rāmāyaṇa




                                                                                                       Reprint 2026-27


Chapter 6.indd 128                                                                                                                                         08-04-2025 11:38:35
                     One of the caves prominently displays the Hāthīgumphā
                     inscription, written in Brahmi script, which records King
                     Khāravela’s accomplishments year after year, including his
                     victorious military campaigns and his benevolent works for the
                     welfare of his people. Khāravela also proudly declares that he
                     created a ‘council of ascetics and sages’ from a hundred regions
                     and is ‘accomplished in extraordinary virtues, respector of every
                     sect and repairer of every temple’. Once again, a ruler takes
                     pride in extending his protection to all schools of thought. This
                     is a fundamental part of what we may call the ‘Indian ethos’.

                        THINK ABOUT IT
                        Notice the regularity of the rock-cut chambers sculpted
                        nearly two millennia ago. How did artisans achieve such
                        precision with just a chisel and a hammer? Picture yourself
                        as a sculptor in that era, shaping stone into art with your own
                        hands. What tools would you use?


                     Kingdoms and Life in the South
                     In India’s southern region, this period, between the 2nd or 3rd
                     century BCE and the 3rd century CE, saw the rise to prominence
                     of three powerful kingdoms — the Cheras, the Cholas and the
                     Pānḍyas — which often competed with each other for control
                     over the South, while also contributing to the region’s growth
                     in trade and culture. Let’s remember how Aśhoka’s empire
                     stopped at those south Indian kingdoms (which he mentions in
                     his edicts), which suggests that they remained independent even
                     at the height of Mauryan power. And although Khāravela claims
                     that he defeated an alliance of south Indian kings that threatened
                                                                                          6 – The Age of Reorganisation



                     his own territory, the location of that battle is unknown and he
                     does not seem to have invaded the southern region.
                                                                                          Tapestry of the Past




                        THINK ABOUT IT
                        In the map given on next page, you may notice different
                        symbols alongside the names of the kingdoms. What do
                        these symbols represent? Think about how they highlight the
                        unique identities of the kingdoms.                                129




                                                         Reprint 2026-27


Chapter 6.indd 129                                                                                    08-04-2025 11:38:35
                                                                                        Kave
                                                                                               ri R.




                                                                                                                                             A
                                                                                                                                            OL
                                                                                                                                            CH
                                                                                                                                  Uraiyūr
                                                                                                   Vanji (Karur)                                 Bay of
                                                                      Arabian sea
                                                                                                                                                 Bengal
                                                                                         CH                         Madurai
                                                                                           ERA

                                                                                                                                  YA
                                                                                                                              Ḍ
                                                                                                                          N
                                                                                                                     PĀ




                                                                          Fig. 6.14. Kingdoms in the South (note that borders are approximate
                                                                                                 and fluctuated in time).

                                                                          That period saw the advent of many poets whose works,
                                                                          collectively known as ‘Sangam literature’, defined the entire
                                                                          era: it came to be known as the ‘Sangam Age’. The word sangam
                                                                          is derived from the Sanskrit sangha, which translates to
               Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 1




                                                                          ‘association’ and ‘coming together’ — in this context, referring
                                                                          to an assembly of the poets. The Sangam literature, the oldest
                                                                          in south India, consists of several collections or anthologies of
                                                                          poems and is much consulted by historians who investigate
                                                                          the society and culture of the times. Primarily, Sangam poetry
                                                                          expresses with great skill and delicacy personal emotions such
                                                                          as love or societal values like heroism and generosity.

                                                                          The Cholas
                                                                          The Sangams refer to three ‘crowned kings’ — the Cholas, Cheras
                                                                          and Pānḍyas. The Cholas were a powerful dynasty that ruled
                                                                          parts of south India from the 3rd century BCE to the 13th century
                                                                          CE. The Chola king Karikāla is said to have defeated a combined
              130
                                                                          force of the Cheras and Pānḍyas and established his supremacy.



                                                                                                       Reprint 2026-27


Chapter 6.indd 130                                                                                                                                        08-04-2025 11:38:36
                          Silappadikāram: The Tale of the Anklet

                     This     famous      epic,
                     composed soon after the
                     Sangam collections, tells
                     the story of Kaṇṇagi, who
                     lived happily with her
                     husband Kovalan in the
                     prosperous Chola capital
                     city of Puhār (identified
                     with      Kāveripattinam
                     seen earlier). However,
                     Kovalan fell in love with
                     a dancer and eventually
                     lost all his wealth
                     over her. Realising his
                     mistake, he returned to
                     Kaṇṇagi, who forgave
                     him. They then travelled
                     to Madurai, the capital
                     of the Pānḍya kingdom,
                     hoping to rebuild their          Fig. 6.15. Statue of Kaṇṇagi, Chennai
                     lives.
                     To start anew, Kaṇṇagi gave Kovalan one of her anklets to sell;
                     however, he was falsely accused of theft and executed by the
                     Pānḍya king. Devastated, Kaṇṇagi proved his innocence by
                     revealing her second anklet. The king, realising his mistake,
                     died of shock. Kaṇṇagi then cursed Madurai, invoking the god
                                                                                                6 – The Age of Reorganisation




                     of fire who destroyed the city. She then walked further west to
                     the Chera kingdom, where she was honoured as a goddess. Even
                                                                                                Tapestry of the Past




                     today, Kaṇṇagi is worshipped in Tamil Nadu and Kerala.
                     Silappadikāram’s exquisite poetry thus centres on the principles
                     of justice and the ruler’s dharma to protect it. It also takes us
                     through cities rich in traded goods, through three kingdoms,
                     and also through several schools of thought.
                                                                                                131




                                                      Reprint 2026-27


Chapter 6.indd 131                                                                                          08-04-2025 11:38:37
                                                                      THINK ABOUT IT
                                                                                                             Observe the statue of the
                                                                                                             king. How is he depicted?
                                                                                                             What do his posture, clothing,
                                                                                                             and expression say about his
                                                                                                             power and status?



                                                                                                             Fig. 6.16. Statue of King Karikāla at
                                                                                                             the Grand Anicut Memorial Park in
                                                                                                             Tamil Nadu


                                                                      Karikāla undertook many projects for the benefit of the people.
                                                                      Among them is the Kallaṇai or Grand Anicut, a complex water
                                                                      diversion system located at a geographically strategic point
                                                                      just downstream of the Srirangam island. It helped to divert
                                                                      waters from the Kāveri to the central and southern parts of
                                                                      the Kāveri delta. This enabled more land to be brought under
                                                                      cultivation, earning this area the name ‘rice bowl of the South’.
                                                                      Restored several times in the course of time, it is still in use and
                                                                      helps millions of people in Tamil Nadu by providing water for
                                                                      irrigation and thus supporting agriculture in the region.
               Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 1




              132                                                           Fig. 6.17. A view of the Kallaṇai or Grand Anicut




                                                                                           Reprint 2026-27


Chapter 6.indd 132                                                                                                                                   08-04-2025 11:38:38
                     The Cheras
                     Also known as the Keralaputra (sons of Kerala), the Cheras
                     ruled over the western parts of Tamil Nadu and Kerala, with
                     their capital at Vanji, present-day Karur in Tamil Nadu. They
                     played an essential role in shaping the region’s cultural and
                     economic history, encouraging the growth of Tamil literature
                     and patronising Sangam poets.
                     The Cheras were known for their extensive trade connections
                     with the Roman Empire and West Asia, exporting many goods
                     from India to the outside world. The kingdom became a hub for
                     the export of spices, timber, ivory and pearls.

                        THINK ABOUT IT
                        Have you ever wondered how historians uncover the trade
                        relations between two distant kingdoms many centuries
                        ago? Let’s take a moment to brainstorm and discuss how this
                        information comes to light.

                     The Chera kings issued a number
                     of coins under their reign. Do you
                     notice the royal emblem of Cheras
                     on one such coin given below?
                                                            Fig. 6.18. Coins under Chera Kings
                     The Pānḍyas
                     The Pānḍyas’ rule over parts of Tamil Nadu and the surrounding
                     regions, with their capital at present-day Madurai, goes back
                     several centuries BCE. Successive kings expanded the Pāndyan
                     kingdom. In his work Indika, Megasthenes mentions this
                                                                                                 6 – The Age of Reorganisation



                     kingdom as a prosperous one, with a strong administration and
                     involved in active trade with distant powers like the Greeks
                     and Romans, apart from much internal trade (Khāravela, for
                                                                                                 Tapestry of the Past




                     instance, states that he gets hundreds of pearls brought from the
                     Pānḍya kingdom). The Pānḍyas were also an important naval
                     power of the subcontinent. The later Pānḍyas also contributed
                     greatly to the art, architecture, and overall prosperity of the
                     region.
                                                                                                 133




                                                          Reprint 2026-27


Chapter 6.indd 133                                                                                           08-04-2025 11:38:38
                                                                                  THINK ABOUT IT
                                                                                  The Pānḍyas were known for their pearls. Why do you think
                                                                                  pearls were an important article of trade during these times?

                                                                                  The Pānḍyas left many inscriptions in which their kings
                                                                                  asserted their great concern for their subjects’ welfare and their
                                                                                  encouragements to all schools of thought and belief.


                                                                                  Invasions of the Indo-Greeks
                                                                                                                   Having completed our brief journey
                                                                                                                   into south India, it is time to return
                                                                                                                   to the north, where a very different
                                                                                                                   kind of development is about to
                                                                                                                   occur. So far, we have only visited
                                                                                                                   a few native dynasties; yet the same
                                                                                                                   period also witnessed the arrival of
                                                                                                                   invaders who entered through the
                                                                                                                   northwest frontier and took control
                                                                                                                   of the northwestern, northern, and
                                                                                                                   central regions of the Subcontinent.
                                                                                                                    Let us first examine the legacy of
                                                                                                                    Alexander’s brief campaign in the
                                                                                                                    Indus plains. While retreating from
               Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 1




                                                                      Fig. 6.19. The Heliodorus pillar near Vidisha the areas he had conquered, he left
                                                                                                                    satraps behind. Over time, these
                                                                                     regional rulers established their independent domains and
                                                                                     came to be known as ‘Indo-Greeks’.
                                                                                  After the decline of the Mauryas, the areas in the northwestern
                                                                                  regions (roughly present-day Pakistan and Afghanistan) were
                                                                                  an easy target for the Indo-Greeks. However, while they arrived
                                                                                  as conquerors, they were much influenced by the rich local
                                                                                  culture. This cultural interaction led to a blend of Greek and
                                                                                  Indian elements in governance, art, language, and daily life,
                                                                                  shaping the cultural landscape of the region.
                                                                                  The Heliodorus pillar, near Vidisha (Madhya Pradesh), is a
              134                                                                 notable example of such connections. It is named after an Indo-




                                                                                                      Reprint 2026-27


Chapter 6.indd 134                                                                                                                                          08-04-2025 11:38:39
                     Greek ambassador, who in his inscription praises Vāsudeva as
                     the ‘god of gods’. The inscription also states, “Three immortal
                     precepts (footsteps) [...] when practised lead to heaven: self-
                     restraint, charity, consciousness.”
                     During excavations in north India, archaeologists have found
                     many Indo-Greeks coins, which have provided most of the
                     information we have about these rulers. Those coins were made
                     of gold, silver, copper and nickel often portraying a king on one
                     side and Greek deities on the other. However, some coins, instead,
                     depicted Indian deities like Vāsudeva-Kṛiṣhṇa and Lakṣhmī.
                     The rule of the Indo-Greeks ended with the invasions of the
                     Indo-Scythians or Śhakas (see a little below).

                      LET’S EXPLORE
                      What do you think might have
                      been the meaning of having
                      deities like Vāsudeva-Kṛiṣhṇa
                                                              Fig. 6.20. An Indo-Greek silver coin
                      or Lakṣhmī on some Indo-Greek           with Vāsudeva-Kṛiṣhṇa on one side
                      coins?


                      DON’T MISS OUT
                      The Śhakas (sometimes
                      called Indo-Scythians) also
                      invaded the northwest of
                      the Subcontinent and ruled
                      from the latter part of the
                      2nd century BCE to the 5th
                      century CE. Their kingdoms
                                                                                                         6 – The Age of Reorganisation




                                                      Fig. 6.21. Notice how dates are provided in both
                      rose to power after the          the Gregorian and Śhaka Samvat eras on this
                      Indo-Greeks, and they were      official publication of the Government of India.
                                                                                                         Tapestry of the Past




                      in power until the arrival of the Kuṣhāṇas (see below). It
                      was during this period that the Śhaka Samvat calendar was
                      developed. It is 78 years behind the Gregorian calendar
                      (except from January–March, when it is behind by 79 years).
                      It was adopted as the Indian National Calendar in 1957.                            135




                                                           Reprint 2026-27


Chapter 6.indd 135                                                                                                   08-04-2025 11:38:39
                                                                                    The Emergence of the Kuṣhāṇas
                                                                                    The Kuṣhāṇas, originally from central Asia, entered India
                                                                                    probably in the 2nd century CE. At its peak, their empire extended
                                                                                    from central Asia to large parts of northern India. Their rule
                                                                                    marked a period of extensive cultural intermixing and had a
                                                                                    profound impact on the history of the Indian subcontinent.
                                                                                    When he was not busy with his military campaigns, Kaṇiṣhka
                                                                                    encouraged art and culture, leading to the development of new
                                                                                    artistic styles.

                                                                                                   LET’S EXPLORE
                                                                                                   Carefully observe this massive statue (1.85 m
                                                                                                   high) and notice the clothing, weapon, and
                                                                                                   footwear. What does it tell us about this
                                                                                                   figure?

                                                                                                   This famous ‘headless’ statue is of King Kaṇiṣhka,
                                                                                                   probably the most powerful ruler of the Kuṣhāṇa
                                                                                                   dynasty. The Brahmi inscription on the statue
                                                                                                   reads, ‘mahārāja rājadhirāja devaputra kaṇiṣhka’,
                                                                                                   that is, ‘The great king, king of kings, son of God,
                                                                      Fig. 6.22. Headless statue   Kaṇiṣhka’.
                                                                           of King Kaṇiṣhka
               Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 1




                                                                                    LET’S EXPLORE
                                                                                    Observe the coins carefully. Who, besides the emperor,
                                                                                    appears on the coin?




                                                                                                         Fig. 6.23. Coins of Kaṇiṣhka

              136




                                                                                                       Reprint 2026-27


Chapter 6.indd 136                                                                                                                                        08-04-2025 11:38:43
                     On the first coin, Kāṇiṣhka is shown holding a spear, titled
                     ‘King of Kings’, while the other side features Buddha with the
                     inscription BOΔΔO (Buddha) in Greek script. On the second coin,
                     an emperor appears on one side, and Śhiva with the bull Nandi
                     on the other. Let’s reflect on the following:
                         Why would a powerful ruler feature Buddha and Śhiva on
                          his coins? What does it say about his values and priorities?
                         Can you find modern examples of such symbolic currency?
                     The Kuṣhāṇas held control over significant sections of the Silk
                     Route (on the next page), and during their reign, trade grew,
                     connecting India with other parts of Asia and the West.
                     Continuing the trend set under the Indo-Greek rulers, Kuṣhāṇa
                     art and architecture, exemplified by the Gāndhāra and Mathurā
                     schools of art, are celebrated for their fusion of Indian and Greek
                     styles. The sculptures feature a variety of deities reflecting the
                     peaceful co-existence of various schools of thought. This era saw
                     the rise of representations of deities — like
                     Sūrya or the sun god — which looked more
                     similar to humans and the increase in the
                     development of religious art, laying the
                     groundwork for later temple architecture in
                     the subcontinent.
                     The Gāndhāra style, which emerged in the
                     western regions of Punjab, blended Greco-
                     Roman elements with Indian features. Most
                     sculptures and artefacts from this tradition
                     were crafted in intricate detail from grey-
                     black schist stone. In particular, sculptors           Fig. 6.24. Head of a bodhisattva
                                                                              (or future Buddha) from the
                     produced many fine Buddha images with
                                                                                                               6 – The Age of Reorganisation



                                                                             Gāndhāra School of Art. Note
                     realistic anatomy and flowing robes.                   the fusion of Indian and Greek
                                                                                        features.
                                                                                                               Tapestry of the Past




                         THINK ABOUT IT
                         Do you know where Gāndhāra is? Does it remind you of a
                         character from the epic Mahābhārata?

                                                                                                               137




                                                          Reprint 2026-27


Chapter 6.indd 137                                                                                                         08-04-2025 11:38:43
                                                                                                                                                            SCYTHIA
                                                                           Rome         Byzantium                                                 Samarkand


                                                                                                             Antioch
                                                                                                                                                             Balkh
                                                                                                                                 Qumis- Iran
                                                                                                                 Damascus
                                                                                               Alexandria
                                                                                                                                               PERSIA




                                                                                                                       ARABIA
               Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 1




                                                                                                       EGYPT




                                                                       Fig. 6.25. Some of the trade routes of the ancient world. The network marked
              138                                                     in green shows the Silk Route connecting China with the Mediterranean world
                                                                                       and passing through central Asia, Persia, etc.



                                                                                           Reprint 2026-27


Chapter 6.indd 138                                                                                                                                    08-04-2025 11:38:44
                                                    Luoyang
     Takṣhaśhilā

                                      CHINA
              Mathura
                        Pāṭaliputra




                        Tāmralipti

        INDIA


                                                              6 – The Age of Reorganisation
                                                              Tapestry of the Past




                                                              139




                                        Reprint 2026-27


Chapter 6.indd 139                                                        08-04-2025 11:38:45
                                                                        The Mathurā style developed in
                                                                        the Mathura region of present-
                                                                        day Uttar Pradesh and is known
                                                                        for its distinct Indian style.
                                                                        Unlike the Gāndhāra style, it
                                                                        primarily used red sandstone
                                                                        for its sculptures and reflects
                                                                        less influence from Greco-
                                                                        Roman aesthetics. This art form
                                                                        is known for its depictions of
                                                                        Indian deities, including Kubera,
                                                                        Lakṣhmī, Śhiva, Buddha, yakṣhas
                                                                                                               Fig. 6.26. Kubera, God of ‘wealth’
                                                                        and yakṣhiṇīs and generally
                                                                                                                  from the Mathura School of
                                                                        produced fuller figures with           Art. Did you miss the prominent
                                                                        smooth modelling.                      moustache? The moustache is a
                                                                                                                distinguishing feature of some
                                                                                                                       Indian sculptures.
                                                                        LET’S EXPLORE
                                                                        Now that you are familiar with the basic characteristics of
                                                                        the Mathurā and Gāndhāra styles of art, study the pictures of
                                                                        artefacts given in Fig. 6.27 on the right page and try to identify
                                                                        which school of art each artefact belongs to. Write your
                                                                        observations with justifications and discuss your answers
                                                                        with your classmates.
                 Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 1




                                                                        Despite the political conflicts and power struggles, the period
                                                                        saw remarkable cultural exchange and assimilation. This
                                                                        shared heritage is evident in art and architecture, where styles
                                                                        interacted, but with a dominance of Indian themes (especially
                                                                        Hindu and Buddhist ones). It was also the age when Sanskrit
                                                                        literature flourished, with, in particular, the composition of
                                                                        major Indian texts such as the Mahābhārata and the Rāmāyana
                                                                        (refer to the chapter “Unity in Diversity, or ‘Many in the One’ ” in
                                                                        your Grade 6 textbook).
                                                                        Recognising these connections encourages us to view this
                                                                        ‘Tapestry of the Past’ not as confined to any one kingdom or
                                                                        ruler, but as a dynamic process that works through interaction
               140                                                      and assimilation over time.




                                                                                            Reprint 2026-27


Chapter 6.indd 140                                                                                                                              10-Apr-25 10:48:20 AM
                             1                                2                            3




                             4                                5                            6




                                                                                                       6 – The Age of Reorganisation
                                                                                                       Tapestry of the Past




                     Fig. 6.27.1. A scene of the death of Buddha. Fig. 6.27.2. Bodhisattva Maitreya.
                             Fig. 6.27.3. Śhiva linga being worshipped by Kuṣhāna devotees.
                      Fig. 6.27.4. A Nāga between two Nāgīs, with an inscription referring to the
                       eighth year of Kaṇiṣhka’s reign. Fig. 6.27.5. Kartikeya, the god of war, and
                                     Agni, the god of fire. Fig. 6.27.6. Standing Buddha.              141




                                                        Reprint 2026-27


Chapter 6.indd 141                                                                                                 08-04-2025 11:38:49
                                                                                          Khāravela
                                                                                                                                  Kaṇiṣhka

                                                                                                                  Gautamīputra
                                                                                                                    Sātakarṇi
                                                                                                                                         Karikāla
                                                                       Puṣhyamitra
                                                                         Śhunga




                                                                      200 185             100                               100                200         300



                                                                      BCE                                                                                        CE
                                                                                         Chedis




                                                                                Śhungas

                                                                                                                                             Kuṣhāṇas




                                                                                     Indo-Greeks




                                                                                          Śhakas




                                                                                                           Sātavāhanas
               Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 1




                                                                                                       Chola, Chera, Pāṇḍyas


                                                                                                              Fig. 6.28


                                                                                     Before we move on …
                                                                                     Æ     The period after the disintegration of the Maurya empire
                                                                                           was characterised by the emergence of many big and small
                                                                                           kingdoms across the Subcontinent.
                                                                                     Æ     The internal conflicts were coupled with foreign invasions,
                                                                                           which together led to a period of reorganisation of political
              142                                                                          powers.




                                                                                                          Reprint 2026-27


Chapter 6.indd 142                                                                                                                                                    08-04-2025 11:38:50
                     Æ    This period witnessed a dialogue of various cultures that
                          absorbed each other’s influence to create new styles of art,
                          architecture, coinage, etc., with ultimately a dominance of
                          Indian themes and flourishing Sanskrit literature.
                     Æ    This time was also marked by remarkable developments in
                          trade activities, both internal and external.


                     Questions and activities

                     1.   Why was the post-Maurya era also known as the era of
                          reorganisation?
                     2.   Write a note on the Sangam literature in 150 words.
                     3.   Which rulers mentioned in this chapter included their
                          mother’s name in their title, and why did they do so?
                     4.   Write a note of 250 words about one kingdom from this
                          chapter that you find interesting. Explain why you chose
                          it. After presenting your note in class, find out what
                          kingdoms have been the most selected by your classmates.
                     5.   Imagine you have the chance to create your own kingdom.
                          What royal emblem would you choose, and why? What
                          title would you take as the ruler? Write a note about your
                          kingdom, including its values, rules and regulations, and
                          some unique features.
                     6.   You have read about the architectural developments
                          of the post-Maurya era. Take an outline of the Indian
                          subcontinent and mark the approximate locations of some
                          of the ancient structures mentioned in this chapter.
                                                                                         6 – The Age of Reorganisation
                                                                                         Tapestry of the Past




                                                                                         143




                                                         Reprint 2026-27


Chapter 6.indd 143                                                                           10-Apr-25 10:52:34 AM
               Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 1




              144




                                                                      Reprint 2026-27


Chapter 6.indd 144                                                                      08-04-2025 11:38:50
