                                                                                                              4



                                                                                                    CHAPTER
                    New Beginnings:
                    Cities and States
                     The kingdom shall be protected by fortifying the capital and the towns
                     at the frontiers. The land should not only be capable of sustaining the
                     population but also outsiders in times of calamities. ... It should be
                     beautiful, being endowed with cultivable land, mines, timber forests,
                     elephant forests, and good pastures rich in cattle. It should not depend
                     [only on] rain for water. It should have good roads and waterways. It
                     should have a productive economy, with a wide variety of commodities ….
                                                                                 – Kauṭilya, Arthaśhāstra

                    Fig. 4.1. Ruins of a major structure at Rājagṛiha (modern-day Rajgir
                    in Bihar), when it was the capital of the Magadha mahājanapada.




                    The   Big                        1.    What is meant by ‘Second
                                                           Urbanisation of India’?
                      Questions                      2.    Why were the janapadas and
                                                           mahājanapadas an important
                                                           development in India’s early
                                                           history?
                                                     3.    What kind of system of
                                                           governance did they evolve?



                                                               Reprint 2026-27


Chapter 4.indd 67                                                                                             08-04-2025 10:13:44
                                                                                Let us recall that in the early 2nd millennium BCE (that is,
                                                                                over a few centuries after 2000 BCE), the Indus / Harappan /
                                                                                Sindhu-Sarasvatī civilisation, which we called India’s
                                                                                ‘First Urbanisation’, disintegrated. Some of its cities were
                                                                                abandoned; in others, some people continued living
                                                                                there, but reverting to a rural or village lifestyle. They
                                                                                had to, since all the components of the Harappan urban
                                                                                order had disappeared: elaborate structures, both private
                                                                                and public; crowded streets and busy markets; different
                                                                                communities with specialised occupations (metalsmiths,
                                                                                potters, builders, weavers, craftspeople, and so on); a
                                                                                writing system; a sanitation system; the presence of an
                                                                                administration; and, behind it all, a larger state structure
                                                                                with a ruling class at the head. And for a whole millennium,
                                                                                urban life remained absent from India, though there may
                                                                                have been a few towns here and there in north India.
               Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 1




               68                                                     Fig. 4.2. The fertile Gangetic plains helped the mahājanapadas to grow and prosper.




                                                                                                      Reprint 2026-27


Chapter 4.indd 68                                                                                                                                           08-04-2025 10:13:44
                    Indeed, there were important regional cultures, which we
                    need not study here.
                    Then, in the 1st millennium BCE, a vibrant new phase of
                    urbanisation began in the Ganga plains, parts of the Indus
                    (or Sindhu) basin and neighbouring regions, gradually
                    spreading to other parts of the Subcontinent. How do we
                    know this? Mainly from two sources: (1) archaeological
                    excavations that have confirmed the existence of those
                    ancient urban centres, and (2) ancient literature describing
                    them — late Vedic, Buddhist and Jain literatures are full of
                    references to these new urban centres.
                    This new phase is often called India’s ‘Second
                    Urbanisation’ — which, incidentally, has continued right
                    up to today! Let us see how this phase emerged.

                    Janapadas and Mahājanapadas
                    Towards the end of the 2nd millennium BCE, regional
                    cultures gradually reorganised themselves in north India.
                    As people formed clans or groups, probably sharing a
                    common language and common customs, each clan came
                    to be associated with a territory or janapada led by a
                    rājā or ruler. (‘Janapada’ is a Sanskrit word which means
                    ‘where the people (jana) have set foot (pada),’ that is, have
                    settled down.)
                    The janapadas grew as trade networks expanded and               4 – New Beginnings: Cities and States
                    connected them. By the 8th or 7th centuries BCE, some
                    of those early states had merged together; the resulting
                    bigger units were known as mahājanapadas. Although
                    the texts have different lists of them, the more frequent
                                                                                    Tapestry of the Past




                    list gives the names of 16 mahājanapadas, extending from
                    Gandhāra in the northwest to Anga in the east and to
                    Aśhmaka in central India, close to the Godavari River (see
                    map). There may have been a few more, along with some
                    smaller janapadas continuing independently.
                                                                                       69




                                                     Reprint 2026-27


Chapter 4.indd 69                                                                                 08-04-2025 10:13:45
                                                                      THINK ABOUT IT
                                                                      Notice how many of the mahājanapadas are concentrated in
                                                                      the Ganga plains. There are several possible reasons for this,
                                                                      including the growth of agriculture in the fertile Ganga plains,
                                                                      the availability of iron ore in the mountains and hills (see
                                                                      below about iron), and the formation of new trade networks.


                                                                      LET’S EXPLORE
                                                                      Æ The most powerful of these new states were Magadha,
                                                                        Kosala, Vatsa and Avanti. Looking at the map, can you
                                                                        identify their capitals? Also, how many can you match
                                                                        with Indian cities of today?
                                                                      Æ Compare this map with the map of the regions mentioned
                                                                        in the Mahābhārata (see Fig. 5.4 in the chapter ‘India, That
                                                                        Is Bharat’ in Grade 6) and list the names common to both
                                                                        maps. What do you think this implies?
                                        Moat:
                                      A deep,
                                  wide ditch
                               surrounding
                                                                      The map (Fig. 4.3) shows the mahājanapadas’ capitals. Most
                                  a fort or a                         were fairly large well-fortified cities, with a moat running
                                fortified city
                              and filled with
                                                                      outside the fortifications as further defence. Often, the
                                       water.                         gateways through the rampart walls would be deliberately
                                                                      kept narrow, so guards may control the movement of people
               Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 1




                                                                      and goods entering or leaving the city. It is fascinating to
                                                                      note that most of those ancient capitals continue to be living
                                                                      cities today — ‘modern’ cities that are often 2,500 years old!

                                                                      Early Democratic Traditions
                                                                      Each janapada had an assembly or council, called sabhā
                                                                      or samiti, where matters concerning the clan would be
                                                                      discussed. (Remember, from the chapter on ‘India’s Cultural
                                                                      Roots’, that the words sabhā and samiti first appear in the
                                                                      Vedas, India’s most ancient texts.) We may assume that
                                                                      most of the members were elders in the clan. The rājā
               70                                                     was not expected to rule independently or arbitrarily;




                                                                                         Reprint 2026-27


Chapter 4.indd 70                                                                                                                        08-04-2025 10:13:45
                                   Pushkalavati
                        KAMBOJA
                                  GĀNDHĀRA        Takṣhaśhilā




                                                          KURU
                                                    Indraprastha       Ahichchhatra
                                                                                               Kushīnāra
                                                                      PĀÑCHĀLA Śhrāvastī
                                                     Virāṭa                                                VṚIJJI
                                                     MATSYA      Mathurā              KOSALA
                                                                ŚHŪRASENA                       MALLA         Vaiśhālī
                                                                                  VATSA
                                                                                                      Rājagṛiha       Champā
                                                                       Tripuri            Kauśhāmbī                 ANGA
                                                                                                      MAGADHA
                                                                            CHEDI
                                                          AVANTI
                                                           Ujjayinī




                                                                   AŚHMAKA




                          Fig. 4.3. Map of the sixteen mahājanapadas. Note that their borders are approximate.


                    a good ruler was supposed to take the advice from those
                    assemblies, apart from the ministers and administrators.                                                   4 – New Beginnings: Cities and States
                    Indeed, according to some texts, an incompetent ruler
                    could be removed by the assembly. Of course, while such
                    mentions are significant, it does not mean that this was an
                    established law; let us remember that the data we have for
                                                                                                                               Tapestry of the Past




                    such remote periods is incomplete.
                    In their political systems, the mahājanapadas expanded
                    the basic principles of the janapadas. Some were, in effect,
                    monarchies, in the sense that the rājā was the ultimate
                    authority, supported by ministers and an assembly of                                                          71




                                                                Reprint 2026-27


Chapter 4.indd 71                                                                                                                            08-04-2025 10:13:46
                                                                         elders. His position was hereditary, in the sense that a rājā
                                                                         would usually be the son of the previous one. The king
                                                                         would collect taxes or revenue, maintain law and order,
                                                                         get impressive fortifications built around their capital, and
                                                                         maintain an army to defend the territory or wage war with
                                                                         neighbouring ones, as the case may be. Magadha (located
                                                                         in part of today’s Bihar), Kosala (in part of today’s Uttar
                                                                         Pradesh) and Avanti (in part of today’s Madhya Pradesh)
                                                                         were among the most powerful such states.
                                                                         However, at least two mahājanapadas, Vajji (or Vṛijji) and
                                                                         the neighbouring Malla, had a different system: the sabhā
                                                                         or samiti had more power and took important decisions
                                                                         through discussion, and, if necessary, through vote.
                                                                         Surprisingly, this included the selection of the rājā! This
                                                                         means that those mahājanapadas, which were called gaṇas
                                                                         or sanghas, were not monarchies — their functioning might
                                                                         be called democratic, since members of the assembly were
                                                                         the ones to select the ruler and take major decisions. In fact,
               Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 1




                                                                      Fig. 4.4. Ruins of a complex at Kauśhāmbī, capital of the Vatsa mahājanapada
               72




                                                                                               Reprint 2026-27


Chapter 4.indd 72                                                                                                                                    08-04-2025 10:13:47
                    scholars have often called them ‘early republics’, as they
                    are indeed one of the earliest such systems in the world.

                    More Innovations
                    The age of the janapadas and mahājanapadas was an age of
                    profound change, which would impact Indian civilisation
                    until present times. In the chapter ‘India’s Cultural Roots’
                    in Grade 6, we saw the emergence of several new schools
                    of thought — late Vedic, Buddhist, Jain in particular, and
                    their respective literatures. Those schools disseminated
                    their teachings and literature through scholars, monks
                    and nuns travelling across India or people undertaking
                    pilgrimages. Indian art also underwent a renewal; it will
                    blossom in the age of empires.
                    Urbanisation does not happen without technologies. Let us
                    remember that the Harappan civilisation mastered copper
                    and bronze metallurgy. Now, in this Second Urbanisation,
                    a major shift in technology involved iron metallurgy. In
                    several regions of India, the techniques of extracting and
                    shaping iron were actually perfected from the early 2nd
                    millennium BCE, but it took a few centuries for iron to
                    become a part of daily life. By the late 2nd millennium BCE,
                    iron tools had become widespread, facilitating agriculture
                    on a bigger scale. Iron also made better weapons than
                    bronze, lighter and sharper — swords, spears, arrows,
                    shields, etc. As it happens, there is some evidence of warfare   4 – New Beginnings: Cities and States
                    between neighbouring mahājanapadas — how frequent or
                    how intense it was, of course, is impossible to tell. Such
                    military campaigns, but occasionally alliances too, gave
                    rise to new kingdoms and empires, which we will turn to
                                                                                     Tapestry of the Past




                    later in our journey.
                    Another innovation was the first use of coins in India,
                    made necessary by growing trade. Very soon, coins were
                    exchanged across different regions and even with other
                    parts of the world. The first Indian coins were made of             73




                                                      Reprint 2026-27


Chapter 4.indd 73                                                                                  08-04-2025 10:13:47
                                                                                silver, a soft metal into which symbols could be
                                                                                ‘punched’; they are called ‘punch-marked coins’.
                                                                                Later, coins of copper, gold and other metals were
                                                                                also made. Generally, a mahājanapada issued its
                                                                                own coins, but coins from neighbouring regions
                                                                                were used as well as exchanged in trade.

                                                                      LET’S EXPLORE
                                                                      Fill up the following table with a Yes (or tick mark) or No (or
                                                                      cross mark) in each square, which provides an interesting
                                                                      comparison between these two phases of Indian civilisation.

                                                                                                     First            Second
                                                                                                  Urbanisation      Urbanisation
                                                                      Ganga plains

                                                                      Monasteries

                                                                      Literature

                                                                      Trade

                                                                      Warfare

                                                                      Copper / bronze
               Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 1




                                                                      Iron



                                                                      The Varṇa–Jāti System
                                                                      We saw earlier how human societies grew more complex
                                                                      with the rise of civilisation. Whenever this happens, a
                                                                      society organises itself in several groups based on class,
                                                                      occupation or some other criteria. For instance, there
                                                                      could be different groups concerned with governance,
                                                                      administration, religion, education, trade, town-planning,
                                                                      farming, crafts, arts and all kinds of other professions.
               74




                                                                                         Reprint 2026-27


Chapter 4.indd 74                                                                                                                       08-04-2025 10:13:47
                    Fig. 4.5. A panel of the Sanchi stūpa depicting a smithy (or metal workshop), where different
                                   workers bring firewood, water, stoke the fire, beat the iron, etc.




                                                                                                                    4 – New Beginnings: Cities and States
                                                                                                                    Tapestry of the Past




                           Fig. 4.6. A few punch-marked coins from various ancient cities of north India.

                                                                                                                       75




                                                            Reprint 2026-27


Chapter 4.indd 75                                                                                                                 08-04-2025 10:13:48
                                                                      LET’S EXPLORE
                                                                      Æ Why should a complex society divide itself into such
                                                                        groups? Think about several possible factors why this
                                                                        happens.
                                                                      Æ List other such professions you expect in a complex
                                                                        society of the 1st millennium BCE.


                                                                      In an ideal society, all those groups would complement each
                                                                      other and work in harmony. But most of the time, these
                                                                      divisions also lead to inequalities: some groups acquire
                                                                      more wealth, power or influence than others. In other
                                                                      words, while equality is an ideal that human societies have
                                                                      often aspired to, very few, if any, have ever achieved it.
                                                                      In India, the society was organised in a two-fold system.
                                                                      One category was the jāti, a group or community of people
                                                                      with a specific professional occupation closely tied to their
                                                                      livelihood. The skills that defined a particular jāti — for
                                                                      instance, skill in agriculture, metallurgy, commerce or
                                                                      any craft — was generally transmitted from generation to
                                                                      generation. Often, a jāti would get further subdivided into
                                                                      sub-jātis, each of which developed customs and traditions
               Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 1




                                                                      of its own, for instance concerning marriage, rituals or food
                                                                      habits.
                                                                      Along with the jāti, there is another category, that of varṇa,
                                                                      a concept that emerged from Vedic texts. There were four
                                                                      varṇas: Brahmins were engaged in preserving and spreading
                                                                      knowledge, and in the performance of rituals; Kshatriyas
                                                                      were expected to defend the society and the land, and to
                                                                      engage in warfare if necessary; Vaishyas were supposed to
                                                                      increase the society’s wealth through occupations of trade,
                                                                      business or agriculture; finally, Shudras were the artisans,
                                                                      craftspeople, workers or servants.

               76




                                                                                       Reprint 2026-27


Chapter 4.indd 76                                                                                                                      08-04-2025 10:13:48
                      DON’T MISS OUT
                     You may have heard the English word ‘caste’. It comes from a
                     Portuguese word, casta, as Portuguese travellers to India in the
                     16th century CE tried to make sense of Indian society. While a
                     few scholars consider ‘caste’ to refer to varṇas, most take it to
                     apply to jātis; yet others consider ‘caste’ to refer to the whole
                     varṇa–jāti system.

                    There is historical evidence, both in texts and inscriptions,
                    that in the early period individuals and communities
                    changed their professional occupations if circumstances
                    demanded. For instance, a long drought or some natural
                    calamity could force a community of farmers to migrate
                    to a city and take up other occupations, or some Brahmins
                    would turn to trade or even military activities. This complex
                    system structured Indian society, organised its activities,
                    including economic ones, and therefore gave it some
                    stability. In time, however, the system became rigid and led
                    to inequalities and discrimination towards the lower jātis
                    or some communities excluded from the varṇa-jāti system.
                    This process will be studied in a higher grade.
                    The varṇa-jāti system has had a deep impact on Indian
                    society, and generations of scholars have studied its
                    countless aspects. There is a broad agreement that the
                    system was significantly different (more flexible, in                4 – New Beginnings: Cities and States
                    particular) in earlier periods and became more rigid with
                    the passage of time, in particular during the British rule
                    in India. Let us also keep in mind that while varṇa-jāti has
                    been an important mechanism at work in Indian society, it
                                                                                         Tapestry of the Past




                    is not the only one; there have been many others, some of
                    which we will explore later, especially in the theme ‘Our
                    Cultural Heritage and Knowledge Traditions’.


                                                                                            77




                                                        Reprint 2026-27


Chapter 4.indd 77                                                                                      08-04-2025 10:13:49
                                                                                      THINK ABOUT IT
                                                                                      Inequalities within society can exist in many forms. Have you
                                                                                      encountered any incident where you or anyone you know
                                                                                      might have been made to feel different from others? Do you
                                                                                      think equality is desirable in a society? If so, why? Have you
                                                                                      come across people or initiatives that lessened inequalities?


                                                                                      Developments Elsewhere in India
                                                                                      In this 1st millennium BCE, important communication
                                                                                      routes opened up for purposes of trade, pilgrimage, military
                                                                                      campaigns, etc. Two routes became widely used and are
                                                                                      often mentioned in the literature: the Uttarapatha and the
                                                                                      Dakṣhiṇapatha. The first connected the northwest regions
                                                                                      to the Ganga plains, all the way to eastern India; the second
                                                                                      started from Kauśhāmbī (near Prayagraj), then a capital of
               Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 1




                                                                       Fig. 4.7. Śhiśhupalgarh (today a suburb of Bhubaneswar, first excavated in 1948): one of the
               78                                                     gateways into the city, through the fortifications; the moat, full of water, is visible outside the
                                                                      gateway. Notice the narrowing in the gateway, for control of movement of people and goods.




                                                                                                              Reprint 2026-27


Chapter 4.indd 78                                                                                                                                                           08-04-2025 10:13:49
                    one of the mahājanapadas, and crossed the Vindhya Range
                    of hills to proceed all the way south. We will return to these
                    routes when we explore the formation of empires in India.
                    Many lateral roads also connected with other parts of India,
                    especially the important ports on the western and eastern
                    coasts, which were vibrant centres of trade. In the eastern
                    region, major cities emerged, such as Śhiśhupalgarh (today
                    Sisupalgarh, part of Bhubaneswar), which was the capital
                    of the Kalinga region and followed a strict square ground
                    plan, with imposing fortifications and broad streets.
                    In the Subcontinent’s southern regions, cities began
                    emerging from about 400 BCE, although recent excavations
                    claim to find some signs of commercial activities
                    going further back. Around this time, three kingdoms
                    emerged — the Cholas, the Cheras and the Pānḍyas.



                                                               Second Urbanisation
                      Harappan Civilisation




                    1900                           1200                 800                400 300


                BCE                                                                            BCE

                                                                   Janapadas
                                                                                                     4 – New Beginnings: Cities and States

                                                                                     Mahājanapadas
                                                                                                     Tapestry of the Past




                           Fig. 4.8. Timeline covering the period from 1900 BCE to 300 BCE.



                                                                                                        79




                                                               Reprint 2026-27


Chapter 4.indd 79                                                                                                  08-04-2025 10:13:49
                                                                             Fig. 4.9. Shell and gemstones industries at the site of
                                                                                     Kodumanal (near Erode, Tamil Nadu)

                                                                      Apart from archaeological evidence, the most ancient
                                                                      Tamil literature mentions those kingdoms and several of
                                                                      their kings.
               Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 1




                                                                      Because the southern regions are rich in resources such as
                                                                      precious and semiprecious stones, gold, and spices, they
                                                                      profitably traded not only with the rest of India but also
                                                                      with kingdoms and empires overseas.
                                                                      By 300 or 200 BCE, almost the entire Subcontinent, including
                                                                      regions in the Northeast, was one vibrant interconnected
                                                                      land; goods and culture travelled from region to region,
                                                                      and often beyond India to parts of Central and Southeast
                                                                      Asia.
                                                                      About the same time, the mahājanapadas ceased to exist,
                                                                      leaving the place to fresh developments that were going to
               80                                                     reshape India.



                                                                                          Reprint 2026-27


Chapter 4.indd 80                                                                                                                      08-04-2025 10:13:51
                    Before we move on …
                    Æ    From the end of the 2nd millennium BCE, janapadas rose
                         in parts of north and central India; they were smaller
                         states with a rājā at the head taking counsel from an
                         assembly of elders.
                    Æ    The 16 mahājanapadas were the first organised states
                         of the 1st millennium BCE; they witnessed the Second
                         Urbanisation of India, which spread in all directions from
                         the Ganga region, all the way to south India. By 300 BCE or
                         so, the mahājanapadas ceased to exist.
                    Æ    In the same period, a vast network of roads connected
                         north and south, east and west, and eventually all regions
                         of the Subcontinent. People, goods, ideas and teachings
                         travelled along all those roads.



                    Questions and activities
                    1.   Consider the quotation at the start of the chapter and
                         discuss in several groups. Compare your observations and
                         conclusions on what Kauṭilya recommends for a kingdom.
                         Is it very different today?
                    2.   According to the text, how were rulers chosen in early
                         Vedic society?
                    3.   Imagine you are a historian studying ancient India. What
                         types of sources (archaeological, literary, etc.) would you
                         use to learn more about the mahājanapadas? Explain how
                         each source might contribute to your understanding.           4 – New Beginnings: Cities and States

                    4.   Why was the development of iron metallurgy so important
                         for the growth of urbanism in the 1st millennium BCE?
                         You may use points from the chapter but also from your
                         knowledge or imagination.
                                                                                       Tapestry of the Past




                                                                                          81




                                                        Reprint 2026-27


Chapter 4.indd 81                                                                                    08-04-2025 10:13:51
               Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 1




               82




                                                                      Reprint 2026-27


Chapter 4.indd 82                                                                       08-04-2025 10:13:51
