                                                                                                         7



                                                                                               CHAPTER
                     The Gupta Era: An Age
                     of Tireless Creativity
                          Neither force nor mere diplomacy can eliminate evil; nor
                          is righteousness upheld by flattery alone. It is wisdom
                          and knowledge that truly strengthen a kingdom — not
                          indulgence in luxuries.
                                                            ­— Kālidāsa in Raghuvanśham


                     Fig. 7.1. Landscape of Ajanta caves, dating
                     from the 2nd century BCE to about 480 CE




                                                                                                         7 – The Gupta Era: An Age of Tireless Creativity
                 The     Big                         1.    Who were the Guptas? Why is
                                                           the Gupta period sometimes
                       Questions
                                                           called the ‘classical age’ in
                                                           Indian history?
                                                                                                         Tapestry of the Past




                                                     2.    What was happening in the rest
                                                           of the subcontinent at this time?
                                                     3.    Who were some great figures
                                                           of this period, and why do their
                                                           stories matter today?
                                                                                                         145




                                                               Reprint 2026-27


Chapter 7.indd 145                                                                                                         08-04-2025 11:41:36
                                                                                             Dhruv and Bhavisha had just returned from their journey
                                                                                             to the Pānḍya kingdom. They had seen the splendid
                                                                                             markets, taken a short trip on a ship, and met some
                                                                                             Roman traders buying pearls. Now they were itching to
                                                                                             use Itihāsa again and jump a few centuries. “What would
                                                                                             that be like?” they wondered. “Will the cities be the same?
                                                                                             What about the people and society — would they have
                                                                                             changed? What kind of governance would they have?
                                                                                             Would there be new literature, new art?” They could not
                                                                                             wait to find out and were soon whisked away to …




                                                                                                                                         The Kāmarūpa kingdom
                                                                                                                                         was an important power
                                                                                                                                          that ruled in parts of
                                                                                                                                           modern-day Assam.
                                                                         The Gupta Empire was                                                   Kāmarūpa

                                                                                                           pta Empire
                                                                         the most powerful and
                                                                                                                                                 Kingdom
                                                                                                      Gu
                                                                      flourished from the 3rd to
                                                                       the 6th century CE, with
                                                                        its capital at Pāṭaliputra
                                                                          (present-day Patna).
                                                                                                         Vākāṭaka
                                                                                                         Kingdom
               Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 1




                                                                        The Vākāṭakas ruled in
                                                                         the central part of the
                                                                        subcontinent with their
                                                                       capital at Nandivardhana                               With their capital at
                                                                                                             Kingdom




                                                                      (near present-day Nagpur).                          Kanchipuram, the Pallavas
                                                                                                              Pallava




                                                                                                                            rose to power after the
                                                                                                                           Sātavāhana dynasty and
                                                                                                                         ruled till the latter half of the
                                                                                                                                9th century CE.




             146                                                        Fig. 7.2. Empires and kingdoms during the period from 3rd to 6th century CE.




                                                                                                       Reprint 2026-27


Chapter 7.indd 146                                                                                                                                                 08-04-2025 11:41:37
                     Bhavisha: My head is spinning. There are so many kingdoms and
                     empires. How am I ever going to remember all of this?
                     Dhruv: Do not worry, Bhavisha! Let us understand what is
                     happening, and we’ll remember it.
                     Bhavisha: Is there anything in this period that we can see back
                     home?
                     Dhruv: Let us use our time machine and find out!
                     Bhavisha activates ‘Itihāsa’, and they jump to Mehrauli (in Delhi),
                     where the famous Iron Pillar of Delhi stands.
                     They overhear a tour guide nearby, who was explaining the
                     significance of this pillar.




                                                                                            7 – The Gupta Era: An Age of Tireless Creativity
                                               Fig. 7.3. Iron Pillar, Mehrauli, Delhi

                     Tour Guide: This Iron Pillar of Delhi is over 1,600 years old and
                     still stands tall without rusting. It is a testament to the advanced
                     metallurgical skills of ancient India.
                     Bhavisha: 1,600 years old and not rusting! Let us go and see it.
                                                                                            Tapestry of the Past




                     Bhavisha: Look! Is this the famous ‘iron pillar’?
                     Dhruv: Oh wow! There is something written on it, but I cannot
                     read it.
                     Bhavisha: I wonder who made this? And why? Let’s hear what
                     the guide uncle has to say about this.                                 147




                                                            Reprint 2026-27


Chapter 7.indd 147                                                                                            08-04-2025 11:41:38
                                                                      Tour Guide: The 6-tonne pillar was erected during the reign of
                                                                      Chandragupta II, a ruler of the Gupta dynasty. It was probably
                                                                      erected first in front of the Udayagiri caves (Madhya Pradesh) and
                                                                      brought to Delhi a few centuries later. It was dedicated to Viṣhṇu,
                                                                      and its inscriptions celebrate the king’s achievements.
                                                                      Both: That is so fascinating! We would love to learn more about
                                                                      this king and his empire.
                                                                      Let us begin this exciting journey into the history of the Gupta
                                                                      Empire!

                                                                      DON’T MISS OUT
                                                                      Picture leaving a bicycle out in the rain for just one year — it
                                                                      would soon show signs of rust. Yet this ancient pillar, standing
                                                                      under the open sky for centuries, remains unaltered. Scientists
                                                                      have tried to uncover its secret, and they believe it is because a
                                                                      unique thin layer, created by the special iron used and oxygen
                                                                      from the air, forms on the surface of the iron, protecting it
                                                                      from corrosion.



                                                                      A New Power Emerges
                                                                      By the 3rd century CE, the Kuṣhāṇa Empire, which spread over
                                                                      the north and northwest of the Subcontinent, started to weaken.
               Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 1




                                                                      New kingdoms emerged, setting the stage for a fresh period of
                                                                      consolidation, and the new actor on this stage was the Gupta
                                                                      dynasty.
                                                                      There are various theories on the origin of the Guptas. However,
                                                                      it is widely believed that they emerged in a region near present-
                                                                      day Uttar Pradesh as regional rulers. Over time, they rose to
                                                                      prominence and established a powerful empire. The Gupta
                                                                      period is considered remarkable in Indian history and is
                                                                      marked by significant developments in many areas. The fields of
                                                                      art, architecture, literature and science flourished, particularly
                                                                      during the time of Chandragupta II, and that legacy continues
                                                                      even today.
             148




                                                                                          Reprint 2026-27


Chapter 7.indd 148                                                                                                                          08-04-2025 11:41:38
                     The inscription on the iron pillar in Delhi speaks of a king named
                     ‘Chandra’, who has been identified with Chandragupta II (not
                     to be confused with Chandragupta Maurya from the Maurya
                     dynasty, whom we met earlier). Chandragupta II, also known
                     as ‘Vikramāditya’, was one of the renowned rulers of the Gupta
                     dynasty. He was a devotee of Viṣhṇu and his mount (vāhana)
                     Garuḍa often appears on many inscriptions.

                      DON’T MISS OUT
                      Have you noticed the ‘II’ in Chandragupta II’s name?
                      Historians added this number because there was another
                      ‘Chandragupta’ before him — his grandfather! (This tradition
                      of naming the first son after his grandfather is followed by
                      some Indian families even today.) Chandragupta I, as he is
                      referred to, played a crucial role in the early expansion of the
                      Gupta Empire; he is remembered for his coins and strategic
                      alliances, which helped him consolidate his power and lay the
                      foundation for a strong empire.




                          Fig. 7.4. Gold coin featuring King Chandragupta I with his queen,        7 – The Gupta Era: An Age of Tireless Creativity
                        Kumāradevī; on the reverse side, a seated goddess identified as Lakṣhmī



                     The warrior king
                                                                                                   Tapestry of the Past




                     The prayāga praśhasti, a pillar inscription in Prayagraj, praises
                     the achievements of Samudragupta, Chandragupta II’s father.
                     According to the author of the inscription — the court poet
                     Harisena — the king’s ambition was to be ‘dharaṇi-bandha’ or to
                     ‘unify the Earth’. To this end, he fought many wars, defeating
                                                                                                   149




                                                              Reprint 2026-27


Chapter 7.indd 149                                                                                                   08-04-2025 11:41:39
                                                                                                                       kings, taking over their kingdoms
                                                                                                                       and expanding his empire.
                                                                                                                       Many defeated kings were
                                                                                                                       reinstated and offered tribute
                                                                                                                       to Samudragupta, while others,
                                                                                                                       fearing his might, submitted
                                                                                                                       without protest.
                                                                                                                       Harisena also wrote about how the
                                                                                                                       king supported art, learning and
                                                                                                                       trade, making his kingdom rich
                                                                                                                       and successful. Samudragupta
                                                                                                                       himself is portrayed as a veena
                                                                      Fig. 7.5. An inscription by Harisena
                                                                                                                       player in one of the coins he
                                                                                                                       minted (Fig. 7.6).

                                                                               THINK ABOUT IT
                                                                              Why do you think kings chose to proclaim their achievements
                                                                              in the form of inscriptions?
               Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 1




                                                                                  Fig. 7.6. A seated Samudragupta, playing the veena; on the reverse
                                                                                                        side, goddess Lakṣhmī



                                                                              LET’S REMEMBER

                                                                              Ambitious kings sometimes performed the aśhvamedha yajn͂a
                                                                              to build mighty empires and leave a legacy for the future.
                                                                              Such a significant event was commemorated by minting
                                                                              special coins like the one shown in Fig 7.7.


             150




                                                                                                     Reprint 2026-27


Chapter 7.indd 150                                                                                                                                         08-04-2025 11:41:40
                                                                            Fig. 7.7. This
                                                                            coin depicts
                                                                            the sacrificial
                                                                            horse of the
                                                                            aśhvamedha
                                                                            yajña; the
                                                                            reverse depicts
                                                                            the queen
                                                                            holding a chauri
                                                                            (fly whisk).


                     Some literary sources give us descriptive information about
                     rulers, kingdoms and the people. The Viṣhṇu Purāṇa, for
                     instance, specifies the key regions of the empire: “The Gupta
                     dynasty will rule over Anugaṅga (the middle-Gangetic basin),
                     Prayāga (present-day Prayagraj), Sāketa (Ayodhya), and Magadha
                     (approximately Bihar) and all the surrounding regions.” But at
                     its peak, the Gupta Empire covered a larger area than this — most
                     of present-day north and west India, along with parts of central
                     and east India.

                      LET’S EXPLORE
                      In the Grade 6 chapter ‘Timeline and Sources of History’,
                      we listed multiple sources that help us understand the past.
                      Compile a list of the sources we have referred to so far in the
                      chapter. What did we learn from each source?

                     Imagine what it would have entailed to move a whole army of

                                                                                               7 – The Gupta Era: An Age of Tireless Creativity
                     soldiers, elephants, horses, cooks, and other support staff, as
                     well as the supplies to feed them all. Clearly, the tributary kings
                     must have been asked to provide for these.

                      LET’S EXPLORE
                      Take a political map of India and locate the present-day
                                                                                               Tapestry of the Past




                      states and Union territories where the Guptas ruled (see
                      Fig. 7.8). Mark these states on the map and count how many
                      you found. Then, compare your findings with your friends to
                      see if everyone got the same number or discovered something
                      different!
                                                                                               151




                                                          Reprint 2026-27


Chapter 7.indd 151                                                                                               08-04-2025 11:41:40
                                                                                                                               G                     Indus
                                                                                 us                                                RE                                 PLATEAU OF TIBET
                                                                                                                                        AT
                                                                                        ab
                                                                                 Ind



                                                                                                                                           H
                                                                                       en
                                                                                                                                                     IM
                                                                                       Ch

                                                                                                       j
                                                                                            Su
                                                                                                 tle
                                                                                                                                                           AL
                                                                                                                                                                AYA                   Brahmaputra
                                                                                                                                                                    N   RAN
                                                                                 GREAT                                                                                           GE



                                                                                                                                                   Gh
                                                                                                  Indraprastha                       Ga




                                                                                                                                                     ag
                                                                                INDIAN                                                    ng
                                                                       s




                                                                                                                                                      ha
                                                                                                                                                             Sāketa
                                                                      du




                                                                                                                                               a




                                                                                                                                                        ra
                                                                                DESERT
                                                                      In




                                                                                                                                                                      Vaiśhālī         KĀMARŪPA

                                                                                                                                            Prayāga Kāśhī Pāṭaliputra
                                                                             RANN OF                                                                               Magadha
                                                                                                            Ujjayinī
                                                                             KACHCHH                                                Narmada
                                                                                                                                                                        Tāmralipti



                                                                                                           God
                                                                                                                 ava
                                                                                                                       ri          VĀKĀṬAKA


                                                                                                                   Deccan
                                                                                                                   Plateau
                                                                                                                                                                                  Bay
                                                                           Arabian
                                                                                                                                           PALLAVA
               Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 1




                                                                                                                                                                                   of
                                                                             Sea
                                                                                                                                                                                 Bengal

                                                                                                                       Kav
                                                                                                                             eri
                                                                                                                                                   Kānchīpura




                                                                      Fig. 7.8. The Gupta Empire’s extent. Note that the Vākāṭakas were the allies of the
                                                                      Guptas. The Guptas claim to have conquered parts of the east coast, down to the
             152
                                                                                       Pallavas, whom they may have briefly subdued.




                                                                                                                        Reprint 2026-27


Chapter 7.indd 152                                                                                                                                                                                  08-04-2025 11:41:41
                     A Traveller’s Account of Indian Society in
                     the Gupta Age
                     Chinese traveller Faxian (pronounced as Fa-Shi-Anne) visited
                     India in the early 5th century CE. He set out on this long and
                     difficult pilgrimage to visit sacred Buddhist sites, learn from
                     renowned Indian scholars and collect manuscripts of Buddhist
                     texts so he could take them back to China. Faxian travelled
                     extensively across India, observing her culture, governance and
                     society, and recorded his experiences and observations for the
                     people of his homeland — and for us too — since his travelogue
                     has survived to this day!

                       Below is an excerpt from his travelogue, where he records
                       his observations of the society in the Gupta era.
                       The people are numerous and happy […] they have no need to
                       register households or attend to officials. […] Those who farm
                       royal land pay a portion of their grain. […] The king’s guards and
                       attendants have salaries […] The cities are the greatest in the
                       Middle Kingdom [i.e. the Gangetic plains], and the inhabitants
                       are rich, prosperous, and practice kindness and righteousness.
                       Heads of Vaishya families [i.e. merchants or traders] establish
                       houses for charity and medicines […] the poor, orphans and the
                       sick are cared for […] doctors provide treatment, and the needy
                       receive food and medicines. […] The city has many wealthy
                       Vaishya elders and foreign merchants, with beautiful homes


                                                                                            7 – The Gupta Era: An Age of Tireless Creativity
                       […] The lanes are kept in good order.
                                                           – A Record of Buddhistic
                                      Kingdoms (AD 399–414) (Translated by J. Legge)


                      LET’S EXPLORE
                                                                                            Tapestry of the Past




                      Read the excerpt from Faxian given above and identify the
                      key features of the society he describes. Write down your
                      observations and compare your notes with your friends — you
                      might be surprised to see how differently others interpret the
                      same text!
                                                                                            153




                                                          Reprint 2026-27


Chapter 7.indd 153                                                                                            08-04-2025 11:41:41
                                                                 Outcastes:      Excerpts from historical accounts like Faxian’s are valuable
                                                                   Someone
                                                                     who has
                                                                                 sources, but they reflect only the writer’s perspective and focus
                                                                        been     at one point in time and for a limited portion of the society
                                                                     rejected    they describe. Let us not, however, forget that elsewhere in his
                                                               from a social
                                                                  or cultural    travelogue, Faxian also describes the harsh treatment of the
                                                                    group; in    chanḍālas, who were regarded as outcastes and lived outside
                                                                   this case,
                                                                 a category      the city limits.
                                                                   of people     Just as you may have perceived the excerpt from Faxian’s
                                                                 considered
                                                                      socially   travelogue differently from your friends, a group of historians
                                                                  too low to     may examine the same source and draw varied interpretations
                                                                  be part of
                                                                   the varṇa     from it. Historians then look at more sources to corroborate their
                                                                     system.     understanding. This reminds us of the need to assess multiple
                                                                                 sources, perspectives and interpretations before drawing
                                                                                 conclusions.


                                                                                 Glimpses of the Gupta Empire
                                                                                 Governance and administration
                                                                                 Let us observe the map in Fig. 7.8. You will notice that many
                                                                                 kingdoms coexisted during the same period. Some of them may
                                                                                 have been at war with each other in their ambition to expand
                                                                                 their control. Recall what we saw earlier about Kauṭilya’s ideas
                                                                                 on ruling a kingdom. He advised rulers to form alliances (mitra)
                                                                                 as one of the components of the saptānga.
               Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 1




                                                                                 New kings … new titles
                                                                                 Inscriptions and coins provide valuable insights into the
                                                                                 titles adopted by Gupta rulers, such as ‘mahārājadhirāja’,
                                                                                 ‘samrāṭ’, and ‘chakravartin’. These titles reflected their claim
                                                                                 to supreme authority and emphasised their superiority
                                                                                 over earlier rulers who used simpler titles like ‘rājan’ and
                                                                                 ‘mahārāja’.

                                                                                 The Gupta rulers used various strategies, including military
                                                                                 conquests, diplomacy, and alliances, to expand and consolidate
                                                                                 their vast empire. The last method included matrimonial
                                                                                 alliances. A well-known example is that of Prabhāvatī Gupta,
             154




                                                                                                    Reprint 2026-27


Chapter 7.indd 154                                                                                                                                    08-04-2025 11:41:41
                     daughter of Chandragupta II, who was married to a prince of                          Regent
                                                                                                          Ruler: A
                     the Vākāṭaka kingdom — the Guptas’ neighbours to the south.                          regent
                     Tragically, the Vākāṭaka prince died early, making her the regent                    temporarily
                                                                                                          governs a
                     ruler of the kingdom. During her reign, she ensured that the
                                                                                                          kingdom
                     ties between the Vākāṭakas and the Guptas remained strong.                           for a
                     One of her inscriptions describes her as a ‘mother of two kings’,                    monarch
                                                                                                          unable to
                     referring to her two sons who ascended the Vākāṭaka throne. As                       do so until
                     a devotee of Viṣhṇu like her father, Prabhāvatī is also associated                   they can.
                     with the construction of seven temples dedicated to this god and
                     his avatars. Some of these temples are in Ramagiri (Ramtek hill)
                     in present-day Maharashtra.




                        Fig. 7.9. The Kevala Narasimha temple dedicated to Narasimha, one of the avatars of
                      Viṣhṇu; according to some historians, this temple was constructed by Prabhāvatī Gupta’s
                                                     daughter in her memory


                      LET’S EXPLORE
                      Observe       the    painting   of                                                                7 – The Gupta Era: An Age of Tireless Creativity
                      Prabhāvatī Gupta sitting in her
                      court (Fig. 7.10). Take note of
                      the details — her attire, posture,
                      the people around her, and the
                                                                                                                        Tapestry of the Past




                      setting of the court. What do
                      these elements tell you about her
                      life, role, and the time she lived
                      in? Discuss your observations in
                      groups and share your insights
                                                                       Fig. 7.10. An artist’s reimagination of
                      with the class.                                  Prabhāvatī Gupta sitting in her court            155




                                                              Reprint 2026-27


Chapter 7.indd 155                                                                                                                        08-04-2025 11:41:42
                                                                      The Gupta Empire had a well-organised system of administration.
                                                                      Instead of controlling everything from a central authority, they
                                                                      divided the empire into provinces and granted land to local
                                                                      rulers, priests and chieftains. These land grants were carefully
                                                                      inscribed on copper plates to keep accurate records — many of
                                                                      which have been discovered by archaeologists in recent times.
                                                                      This system helped ensure proper tax collection and allowed the
                                                                      Gupta rulers to govern efficiently while still giving local leaders
                                                                      some control over their regions.

                                                                      Thriving trade
                                                                      The primary source of revenue of the Gupta’s was land tax.
                                                                      Other sources included fines, taxes on mines, irrigation, trade and
                                                                      crafts. This revenue was used for administration, maintaining
                                                                      the army, building temples and infrastructure, and supporting
                                                                      scholars and artists.
                                                                      As we see once again, for such an empire to sustain itself, it had
                                                                      to promote a vibrant internal and external trade. In the Gupta
                                                                      era, India traded with the Mediterranean world, Southeast Asia
                                                                      and China, exporting textiles, spices, ivory and gemstones. The
                                                                      Indian Ocean trade network connected Indian ports to distant
                                                                      markets. One significant stop on the way to the Mediterranean
                                                                      markets was Socotra Island, strategically located in the Arabian
                                                                      Sea. Archaeological evidence, such as pottery, inscriptions in
                                                                      the Brahmi script, and designs such as a Buddhist stūpa, has
               Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 1




                                                                      established the presence of Indian traders there over several
                                                                      centuries, apart from traders from Egypt, Arabia, Rome and
                                                                      Greece. This small island carries evidence of the rich cultural
                                                                      exchanges that trade promoted in the Indian Ocean.

                                                                      New Ideas and Wonders: The Classical Age
                                                                      As we saw, Gupta rulers were devout followers of Viṣhṇu; this
                                                                      is often reflected in their coins and inscriptions. However,
                                                                      they also supported other traditions and schools of thought.
                                                                      They patronised Buddhist institutions, including the renowned
                                                                      Nālandā university and several other Buddhist vihāras
                                                                      (monastery). Their approach was inclusive and open. We will
                                                                      explore these institutions further in higher grades.
             156




                                                                                         Reprint 2026-27


Chapter 7.indd 156                                                                                                                          08-04-2025 11:41:42
                                             Fig. 7.11. Remains of Nalanda University

                     Indeed, the prolonged period of peace and stability during the
                     Gupta period promoted notable achievements in various fields,
                     leading some historians to label this period the ‘classical age’
                     of India. It was also the time when knowledge from previous
                     eras was consolidated and compiled into numerous texts.
                     Sanskrit literature flourished, with Kālidāsa’s works and many
                     major Purāṇas. Āryabhaṭa and Varāhamihira recorded major
                     advancements in mathematics and astronomy, while medical texts
                     compiled and refined medical theories and practices. Metallurgy
                     also progressed, as we saw with the rust-resistant Iron Pillar.
                     This stability strengthened the
                     economy, allowing the state to
                     support scholars, artists, and
                     scientists, leading to cultural

                                                                                                         7 – The Gupta Era: An Age of Tireless Creativity
                     and intellectual growth.
                     Chandragupta II kept himself
                     surrounded by many learned
                     men, poets and artists, and his
                     patronage of such diverse talent
                     enriched his court greatly.
                                                                                                         Tapestry of the Past




                     Let us take a look at some of
                     the remarkable figures of this
                     period.                                   Fig. 7.12. Chandragupta II goes to war
                                                              (an artist’s imagination from the 1920s)

                                                                                                         157




                                                          Reprint 2026-27


Chapter 7.indd 157                                                                                                         08-04-2025 11:41:43
                                                                      Āryabhaṭa: He lived in Kusumapura (near present-day Patna), a
                                                                      famous centre of learning, around 500 CE and authored a short
                                                                      treatise of mathematics and astronomy called Āryabhaṭīya. He
                                                                      gave formulas to calculate the motions of the Sun, the Moon and
                                                                      the planets, and proposed that the Earth spins on its axis, which
                                                                      explains the alternation of day and night. He gave the length
                                                                      of a year as 365 days, 6 hours, 12 minutes, and 30 seconds, just
                                                                      a few minutes off from the modern value (365 days, 5 hours,
                                                                      48 minutes, and 45 seconds). Āryabhaṭa also provided a fair
                                                                      estimate of the size of the Earth and a correct explanation for
                                                                      solar and lunar eclipses. His work became the foundation for
                                                                      further scientific advances in India and beyond. In mathematics,
                                                                      Āryabhaṭa described a number of techniques of calculation and
                                                                      equation-solving, some of which you learn at school without
                                                                      knowing that they were first formulated 1500 years ago!

                                                                                                              Varāhamihira: He was a
                                                                                                              mathematician, astronomer
                                                                                                              and astrologer from the same
                                                                                                              period. He lived in Ujjayinī, a
                                                                                                              city famous for its tradition
                                                                                                              of learning and scholarship.
                                                                                                              His    encyclopedic     work,
               Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 1




                                                                                                              Bṛihat Samhitā, covered a
                                                                                                              wide range of subjects from
                                                                                                              astronomy and astrology
                                                                                                              to    weather     forecasting,
                                                                                                              architecture, town planning
                                                                                                              and even farming. His
                                                                                                              ability to observe the world,
                                                                                                              apply logical reasoning, and
                                                                                                              combine it with traditional
                                                                                                              knowledge made him a
                                                                                Fig. 7.13                     pioneer in science.


             158




                                                                                            Reprint 2026-27


Chapter 7.indd 158                                                                                                                              08-04-2025 11:41:44
                     LET’S EXPLORE
                     Let’s join Bhavisha and Dhruv with their time machine in the
                     time of the Guptas. You are getting an opportunity to meet
                     Āryabhaṭa and Varāhamihira—what would you ask them?
                     Divide the class into two groups and create a series of questions
                     for an interview with them.




                             Fig. 7.14. The yakṣha’s message to the clouds – a scene from Meghadūtam.

                               Kālidāsa: Little is known about Kālidāsa’s life; legends
                               suggest that he was once ridiculed by others, which


                                                                                                        7 – The Gupta Era: An Age of Tireless Creativity
                               motivated him to work hard and transform his life. He
                               is renowned for his contributions to Sanskrit literature
                               and exquisitely refined poetry. One of his celebrated
                               compositions is Meghadūtam, or ‘The Cloud Messenger’.
                               It tells the story of a yakṣha (minor deity), who, after
                               being banished from his home by his master, sends a
                               message to his beloved through a passing cloud. Apart
                                                                                                        Tapestry of the Past




                               from the many emotions of love, the poem describes in
                               great detail the landscapes and weather of north India
                               on its journey to the beloved.


                                                                                                        159




                                                           Reprint 2026-27


Chapter 7.indd 159                                                                                                        08-04-2025 11:41:45
                                                                            DON’T MISS OUT
                                                               Codified:    Did you know that Āyurveda got codified during the Gupta
                                                            Arranged or
                                                                            period? This Indian traditional system of medicine has much
                                                            written in an
                                                              organised     older roots, going back several centuries BCE. Texts like
                                                                     and
                                                                            the Charaka Saṃhitā and Suśhruta Saṃhitā, which laid the
                                                             systematic
                                                                     way.   foundation for Ayurvedic practices still in use today, were
                                                                            compiled and given their final shape during the Gupta period.
                                                                            They deal with a wide range of topics — the cataloguing and
                                                                            diagnosing of diseases, their treatments, the importance of
                                                                            diet in maintaining good health, the preparation of medicines,
                                                                            and surgical techniques advanced for their time. Importantly,
                                                                            Āyurveda emphasises holistic healing and a deep connection
                                                                            between the mind, body, and nature.


                                                                            The Quest for Beauty
                                                                            The Gupta rulers created a supportive environment where
                                                                            creativity and craftsmanship thrived; some of the iconic works
                                                                            of history were produced during this time. Many key centres
                                                                            of art emerged during these times, including Sārnāth (near
                                                                            Varanasi in present-day Uttar Pradesh), known for its exquisite
                                                                            sculptures of the Buddha, and the awe-inspiring Ajanta caves
                                                                            (in present-day Maharashtra). The rock-cut caves and detailed
               Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 1




                                                                            carvings of deities at Udayagiri (Madhya Pradesh) are another
                                                                            example of this abundant artistic production. ‘Gupta art’, as it
                                                                            is sometimes called, set high standards of aesthetics and beauty
                                                                            that left a lasting impact. (See Figures 7.15 to 7.18)

                                                                            LET’S EXPLORE
                                                                            Take a close look at the samples of Gupta sculptures shown
                                                                            in Fig 7.15.1. and 7.15.2. By looking at the attributes, can
                                                                            you guess which deities are depicted here? Write your
                                                                            observations in the space provided and share your thoughts
                                                                            during the class discussion!


             160




                                                                                              Reprint 2026-27


Chapter 7.indd 160                                                                                                                             08-04-2025 11:41:45
                     The Decline of the Guptas
                     By the 6th century CE, the Gupta Empire began showing signs
                     of decline as the later rulers faced challenges from external
                     invasions. The fierce Hūṇa tribe from central Asia repeatedly
                     attacked the empire, weakening its control over north India. At
                     the same time, the rise of powerful regional rulers led to internal
                     conflicts. However, was this truly the end, or the beginning of a
                     period that marked a turning point in Indian history? We will
                     explore this question in the next part of this book.


                     Meanwhile in the South and Northeast ...
                     Let us go back to the map in Fig. 7.8. While the Guptas ruled in
                     the north, the Pallavas emerged as a powerful dynasty in the
                     south, gradually consolidating their power in parts of present-
                     day Tamil Nadu, Karnataka, Telangana and Andhra Pradesh.
                     Their origins are not clearly known, but they appear to have
                     been a tributary power under the Sātavāhanas, whom we
                     encountered in the previous chapter, and to have gained power
                     as the Sātavāhanas declined.
                     The Pallavas were also great patrons of art and architecture. Most
                     of them were devotees of Śhiva and are credited with constructing
                     magnificent temples and rock-cut caves, some of which we will
                     visit when we explore classical Indian architecture. The capital
                     of the Pallavas, Kānchipuram (in present-day Tamil Nadu), often


                                                                                           7 – The Gupta Era: An Age of Tireless Creativity
                     known as the ‘city of a thousand temples’, developed as one of
                     the major centres of learning in the south. The establishment of
                     ghaṭikās — centres of learning that emerged during the reign of
                     the Sātavāhanas — fostered an environment for education and
                     intellectual growth.
                     In the northeastern region, the Kāmarūpa kingdom, ruled by
                                                                                           Tapestry of the Past




                     the Varman dynasty, extended over the Brahmaputra valley
                     (broadly, present-day Assam) and northern parts of present-day
                     Bengal and Bangladesh. An ancient name for the Brahmaputra
                     valley of Assam is Prāgjyotiṣha, mentioned in the Rāmāyaṇa
                     and Mahābhārata; the latter text mentions Bhagadatta, king of
                                                                                           161




                                                          Reprint 2026-27


Chapter 7.indd 161                                                                                           08-04-2025 11:41:45
                                                                                               Various aspects of Gupta art




                                                                           Fig. 7.15.1 to 7.15.3. In the 3rd image, these terracotta sculptures from the Gupta period
                                                                        (Ahichchhatra, western Uttar Pradesh) depict India’s sacred rivers, Ganga and Yamuna. Their
                                                                       vāhanas distinguish them: Ganga stands on a makara (a mythical creature akin to a crocodile),
                                                                      while Yamuna stands on a tortoise. Water flows over their heads, and the pot is another reminder
                                                                                                          of their manifestation as rivers.
               Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 1




             162                                                       Fig. 7.16. (Left) Deogarh (Uttar Pradesh), (Right) Viṣhṇu on Śheṣhnāg from Daśhāvatāra temple




                                                                                                               Reprint 2026-27


Chapter 7.indd 162                                                                                                                                                             08-04-2025 11:41:46
                       Fig. 7.17. The renowned Ajanta Caves were carved out during this period with the
                      support of the Guptas and Vākāṭakas. Left: An elaborate cave replicating a temple
                       with a central stūpa from which a seated Buddha emerges (note the arched roof
                            imitating wooden beams). Right: A painting of Bodhisattva Padmapāṇi.




                                                                                                            7 – The Gupta Era: An Age of Tireless Creativity
                                                                                                            Tapestry of the Past




                      Fig. 7.18.1. to 7.18.3. Udayagiri Caves and a Gupta-era temple near Sanchi are both
                     located in Madhya Pradesh. Arjuna and Karṇa in battle — A sculpted depiction from
                                                         the Mahābhārata
                                                                                                            163




                                                             Reprint 2026-27


Chapter 7.indd 163                                                                                                            08-04-2025 11:41:49
                                                                                        Chandragupta II




                                                                             Samudragupta

                                                                                                                          Āryabhaṭa

                                                                                                                                        Varāhamihira
                                                                                                   Prabhāvatī Gupta
                                                                                                                  Kālidāsa



                                                                       300       350         400            450              500             550       600


                                                                      CE                                                                                 CE



                                                                                       Vākāṭakas




                                                                                                                                  Kāmarūpa




                                                                                                   Guptas




                                                                                                                       Pallavas
               Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 1




                                                                                                      Fig. 7.19



                                                                                Prāgjyotiṣha (modern-day Assam), as fighting on the side of the
                                                                                Kauravas in the Great War, and some historical rulers claimed
                                                                                him among their ancestors. Be that as it may, the Kāmarūpa
                                                                                kingdom was a prominent cultural and political centre; temples
                                                                                and monasteries flourished as hubs of learning.
                                                                                Both the Pallavas and Kāmarūpa are mentioned in the prayāga
                                                                                praśhasti we saw earlier. During his southern campaigns,
                                                                                Samudragupta defeated a Pallava ruler but did not take over
                                                                                the region. Instead, he let the local kings, including the Pallavas,
             164




                                                                                                     Reprint 2026-27


Chapter 7.indd 164                                                                                                                                            08-04-2025 11:41:50
                     keep their thrones as long as they accepted his rule and paid
                     tribute. This helped maintain peaceful relations. Under similar
                     conditions, in the northeast, Samudragupta defeated the ruler of
                     Kāmarūpa but did not take direct control. By now, we have seen
                     this pattern recur quite a few times.
                     The Gupta period was a time of remarkable progress. Its influence
                     stretched far beyond the empire, shaping art, science, literature,
                     and governance for centuries. Advances in mathematics,
                     astronomy, medicine and metallurgy, among other fields, laid
                     the foundation for future scientific and technological growth,
                     while beautiful temples and Sanskrit literature continue to
                     inspire today. The Guptas created a stable and prosperous
                     society, setting a model for future rulers. Their legacy is still
                     alive in India’s culture, traditions, and way of life, marking this
                     era as one of the high points in Indian history.

                     Before we move on ...
                     Æ   The Gupta kings consolidated their power through military
                         campaigns, land grants and matrimonial alliances to ensure
                         stability in the empire.
                     Æ   The period saw remarkable contributions in the fields of
                         art, literature, science and mathematics.
                     Æ   Other than the Guptas, dynasties like Vākāṭakas, Pallavas,
                         and Varmans ruled in their respective regions, making this
                         period full of cultural and intellectual vibrancy.

                                                                                           7 – The Gupta Era: An Age of Tireless Creativity
                     Questions and activities
                     1. Imagine you receive a letter from someone living in the
                        Gupta Empire. The letter starts like this:
                        “Greetings from Pāṭaliputra! Life here is vibrant and full of
                                                                                           Tapestry of the Past




                        excitement. Just yesterday, I witnessed …” Complete the letter
                        with a short paragraph (250–300 words) describing life in
                        the Gupta Empire.


                                                                                           165




                                                          Reprint 2026-27


Chapter 7.indd 165                                                                                           08-04-2025 11:41:50
                                                                      2. Which Gupta ruler was also known as the ‘Vikramāditya’?
                                                                      3. “Periods of peace support the development of various
                                                                         aspects of sociocultural life, literature, and the development
                                                                         of science and technology.’ Examine this statement in the
                                                                         light of the Gupta empire.
                                                                      4. Recreate a scene from a Gupta ruler’s court.
                                                                         Write a short script, assign roles like the king, ministers, and
                                                                         scholars, and enact a role play to bring the Gupta era to life!
                                                                      5. Match the two columns:

                                                                                     Column A                              Column B
                                                                          (1)   Kānchipuram                  (a) Known for vibrant cave
                                                                                                                  paintings that depict
                                                                                                                  the Jātaka tales.

                                                                          (2)   Ujjayinī                     (b) Famous for rock-cut caves
                                                                                                                  featuring intricate carvings
                                                                                                                  of Hindu deities, especially
                                                                                                                  Viṣhṇu.

                                                                          (3)   Udayagiri                     (c) Capital of the Guptas.

                                                                          (4)   Ajanta                        (d) Known as ‘a city
                                                                                                                  of a thousand temples’.
               Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 1




                                                                          (5)   Pāṭaliputra                  (e) A prominent centre of
                                                                                                                  learning in ancient India.


                                                                      6. Who were the Pallavas and where did they rule?

                                                                      7. Organise an exploration trip with your teachers to a nearby
                                                                         historical site, museum, or heritage building. After the trip,
                                                                         write a detailed report describing your experience. Include
                                                                         key observations about the site’s historical significance, the
                                                                         architecture, artefacts, and any interesting facts you learned
                                                                         during the visit. Reflect on how the trip enhanced your
                                                                         understanding of history.

             166




                                                                                            Reprint 2026-27


Chapter 7.indd 166                                                                                                                               08-04-2025 11:41:50
